
EELDROP AND APPLEPLEX

T.S. Eliot




I


Eeldrop and Appleplex rented two small rooms in a disreputable part of
town. Here they sometimes came at nightfall, here they sometimes slept,
and after they had slept, they cooked oatmeal and departed in the
morning for destinations unknown to each other. They sometimes slept,
more often they talked, or looked out of the window.

They had chosen the rooms and the neighborhood with great care. There
are evil neighborhoods of noise and evil neighborhoods of silence, and
Eeldrop and Appleplex preferred the latter, as being the more evil. It
was a shady street, its windows were heavily curtained; and over it hung
the cloud of a respectability which has something to conceal. Yet it
had the advantage of more riotous neighborhoods near by, and Eeldrop and
Appleplex commanded from their windows the entrance of a police station
across the way. This alone possessed an irresistible appeal in their
eyes. From time to time the silence of the street was broken; whenever a
malefactor was apprehended, a wave of excitement curled into the street
and broke upon the doors of the police station. Then the inhabitants of
the street would linger in dressing-gowns, upon their doorsteps: then
alien visitors would linger in the street, in caps; long after the
centre of misery had been engulphed in his cell. Then Eeldrop and
Appleplex would break off their discourse, and rush out to mingle with
the mob. Each pursued his own line of enquiry. Appleplex, who had the
gift of an extraordinary address with the lower classes of both sexes,
questioned the onlookers, and usually extracted full and inconsistent
histories: Eeldrop preserved a more passive demeanor, listened to the
conversation of the people among themselves, registered in his mind
their oaths, their redundance of phrase, their various manners of
spitting, and the cries of the victim from the hall of justice within.
When the crowd dispersed, Eeldrop and Appleplex returned to their rooms:
Appleplex entered the results of his inquiries into large notebooks,
filed according to the nature of the case, from A (adultery) to Y
(yeggmen). Eeldrop smoked reflectively. It may be added that Eeldrop was
a sceptic, with a taste for mysticism, and Appleplex a materialist with
a leaning toward scepticism; that Eeldrop was learned in theology, and
that Appleplex studied the physical and biological sciences.

There was a common motive which led Eeldrop and Appleplex thus to
separate themselves from time to time, from the fields of their
daily employments and their ordinarily social activities. Both were
endeavoring to escape not the commonplace, respectable or even the
domestic, but the too well pigeonholed, too taken-for-granted, too
highly systematized areas, and,--in the language of those whom they
sought to avoid--they wished "to apprehend the human soul in its
concrete individuality."

"Why," said Eeldrop, "was that fat Spaniard, who sat at the table
with us this evening, and listened to our conversation with occasional
curiosity, why was he himself for a moment an object of interest to us?
He wore his napkin tucked into his chin, he made unpleasant noises while
eating, and while not eating, his way of crumbling bread between fat
fingers made me extremely nervous: he wore a waistcoat cafe au lait, and
black boots with brown tops. He was oppressively gross and vulgar;
he belonged to a type, he could easily be classified in any town
of provincial Spain. Yet under the circumstances--when we had been
discussing marriage, and he suddenly leaned forward and exclaimed:
'I was married once myself'--we were able to detach him from his
classification and regard him for a moment as an unique being, a soul,
however insignificant, with a history of its own, once for all. It is
these moments which we prize, and which alone are revealing. For any
vital truth is incapable of being applied to another case: the essential
is unique. Perhaps that is why it is so neglected: because it is
useless. What we learned about that Spaniard is incapable of being
applied to any other Spaniard, or even recalled in words. With the
decline of orthodox theology and its admirable theory of the soul, the
unique importance of events has vanished. A man is only important as he
is classed. Hence there is no tragedy, or no appreciation of tragedy,
which is the same thing. We had been talking of young Bistwick, who
three months ago married his mother's housemaid and now is aware of the
fact. Who appreciates the truth of the matter? Not the relatives, for
they are only moved by affection, by regard for Bistwick's interests,
and chiefly by their collective feeling of family disgrace. Not the
generous minded and thoughtful outsider, who regards it merely as
evidence for the necessity of divorce law reform. Bistwick is classed
among the unhappily married. But what Bistwick feels when he wakes up
in the morning, which is the great important fact, no detached outsider
conceives. The awful importance of the ruin of a life is overlooked. Men
are only allowed to be happy or miserable in classes. In Gopsum Street a
man murders his mistress. The important fact is that for the man the act
is eternal, and that for the brief space he has to live, he is already
dead. He is already in a different world from ours. He has crossed the
frontier. The important fact is that something is done which can not
be undone--a possibility which none of us realize until we face it
ourselves. For the man's neighbors the important fact is what the man
killed her with? And at precisely what time? And who found the body?
For the 'enlightened public' the case is merely evidence for the Drink
question, or Unemployment, or some other category of things to be
reformed. But the mediaeval world, insisting on the eternity of
punishment, expressed something nearer the truth."

"What you say," replied Appleplex, "commands my measured adherence.
I should think, in the case of the Spaniard, and in the many other
interesting cases which have come under our attention at the door of
the police station, what we grasp in that moment of pure observation
on which we pride ourselves, is not alien to the principle of
classification, but deeper. We could, if we liked, make excellent
comment upon the nature of provincial Spaniards, or of destitution (as
misery is called by the philanthropists), or on homes for working girls.
But such is not our intention. We aim at experience in the particular
centres in which alone it is evil. We avoid classification. We do not
deny it. But when a man is classified something is lost. The majority of
mankind live on paper currency: they use terms which are merely good for
so much reality, they never see actual coinage."

"I should go even further than that," said Eeldrop. "The majority not
only have no language to express anything save generalized man; they are
for the most part unaware of themselves as anything but generalized men.
They are first of all government officials, or pillars of the church, or
trade unionists, or poets, or unemployed; this cataloguing is not only
satisfactory to other people for practical purposes, it is sufficient
to themselves for their 'life of the spirit.' Many are not quite real at
any moment. When Wolstrip married, I am sure he said to himself: 'Now I
am consummating the union of two of the best families in Philadelphia.'"

"The question is," said Appleplex, "what is to be our philosophy. This
must be settled at once. Mrs. Howexden recommends me to read Bergson. He
writes very entertainingly on the structure of the eye of the frog."

"Not at all," interrupted his friend. "Our philosophy is quite
irrelevant. The essential is, that our philosophy should spring from our
point of view and not return upon itself to explain our point of view. A
philosophy about intuition is somewhat less likely to be intuitive than
any other. We must avoid having a platform."

"But at least," said Appleplex, "we are..."

"Individualists. No!! nor anti-intellectualists. These also are labels.
The 'individualist' is a member of a mob as fully as any other man: and
the mob of individualists is the most unpleasing, because it has
the least character. Nietzsche was a mob-man, just as Bergson is an
intellectualist. We cannot escape the label, but let it be one which
carries no distinction, and arouses no self-consciousness. Sufficient
that we should find simple labels, and not further exploit them. I am, I
confess to you, in private life, a bank-clerk...."

"And should, according to your own view, have a wife, three children,
and a vegetable garden in a suburb," said Appleplex.

"Such is precisely the case," returned Eeldrop, "but I had not thought
it necessary to mention this biographical detail. As it is Saturday
night, I shall return to my suburb. Tomorrow will be spent in that
garden...."

"I shall pay my call on Mrs. Howexden," murmured Appleplex.




II


The suburban evening was grey and yellow on Sunday; the gardens of the
small houses to left and right were rank with ivy and tall grass and
lilac bushes; the tropical South London verdure was dusty above and
mouldy below; the tepid air swarmed with flies. Eeldrop, at the window,
welcomed the smoky smell of lilac, the gramaphones, the choir of the
Baptist chapel, and the sight of three small girls playing cards on the
steps of the police station.

"On such a night as this," said Eeldrop, "I often think of Scheherazade,
and wonder what has become of her."

Appleplex rose without speaking and turned to the files which contained
the documents for his "Survey of Contemporary Society." He removed the
file marked London from between the files Barcelona and Boston where it
had been misplaced, and turned over the papers rapidly. "The lady you
mention," he rejoined at last, "whom I have listed not under S. but as
Edith, alias Scheherazade, has left but few evidences in my possession.
Here is an old laundry account which she left for you to pay, a cheque
drawn by her and marked 'R/D,' a letter from her mother in Honolulu (on
ruled paper), a poem written on a restaurant bill--'To Atthis'--and a
letter by herself, on Lady Equistep's best notepaper, containing some
damaging but entertaining information about Lady Equistep. Then there
are my own few observations on two sheets of foolscap."

"Edith," murmured Eeldrop, who had not been attending to this catalogue,
"I wonder what has become of her. 'Not pleasure, but fulness of life...
to burn ever with a hard gem-like flame,' those were her words. What
curiosity and passion for experience! Perhaps that flame has burnt
itself out by now."

"You ought to inform yourself better," said Appleplex severely, "Edith
dines sometimes with Mrs. Howexden, who tells me that her passion for
experience has taken her to a Russian pianist in Bayswater. She is also
said to be present often at the Anarchist Tea Rooms, and can usually be
found in the evening at the Cafe de l'Orangerie."

"Well," replied Eeldrop, "I confess that I prefer to wonder what has
become of her. I do not like to think of her future. Scheherazade grown
old! I see her grown very plump, full-bosomed, with blond hair, living
in a small flat with a maid, walking in the Park with a Pekinese,
motoring with a Jewish stock-broker. With a fierce appetite for food and
drink, when all other appetite is gone, all other appetite gone except
the insatiable increasing appetite of vanity; rolling on two wide
legs, rolling in motorcars, rolling toward a diabetic end in a seaside
watering place."

"Just now you saw that bright flame burning itself out," said Appleplex,
"now you see it guttering thickly, which proves that your vision
was founded on imagination, not on feeling. And the passion for
experience--have you remained so impregnably Pre-Raphaelite as to
believe in that? What real person, with the genuine resources of
instinct, has ever believed in the passion for experience? The passion
for experience is a criticism of the sincere, a creed only of the
histrionic. The passionate person is passionate about this or that,
perhaps about the least significant things, but not about experience.
But Marius, des Esseintes, Edith..."

"But consider," said Eeldrop, attentive only to the facts of Edith's
history, and perhaps missing the point of Appleplex's remarks, "her
unusual career. The daughter of a piano tuner in Honolulu, she secured
a scholarship at the University of California, where she graduated
with Honors in Social Ethics. She then married a celebrated billiard
professional in San Francisco, after an acquaintance of twelve hours,
lived with him for two days, joined a musical comedy chorus, and was
divorced in Nevada. She turned up several years later in Paris and
was known to all the Americans and English at the Cafe du Dome as Mrs.
Short. She reappeared in London as Mrs. Griffiths, published a small
volume of verse, and was accepted in several circles known to us. And
now, as I still insist, she has disappeared from society altogether."

"The memory of Scheherazade," said Appleplex, "is to me that of
Bird's custard and prunes in a Bloomsbury boarding house. It is not my
intention to represent Edith as merely disreputable. Neither is she
a tragic figure. I want to know why she misses. I cannot altogether
analyse her 'into a combination of known elements' but I fail to touch
anything definitely unanalysable.

"Is Edith, in spite of her romantic past, pursuing steadily some hidden
purpose of her own? Are her migrations and eccentricities the sign
of some unguessed consistency? I find in her a quantity of shrewd
observation, an excellent fund of criticism, but I cannot connect them
into any peculiar vision. Her sarcasm at the expense of her friends
is delightful, but I doubt whether it is more than an attempt to mould
herself from outside, by the impact of hostilities, to emphasise her
isolation. Everyone says of her, 'How perfectly impenetrable!' I suspect
that within there is only the confusion of a dusty garret."

"I test people," said Eeldrop, "by the way in which I imagine them as
waking up in the morning. I am not drawing upon memory when I imagine
Edith waking to a room strewn with clothes, papers, cosmetics, letters
and a few books, the smell of Violettes de Parme and stale tobacco. The
sunlight beating in through broken blinds, and broken blinds keeping out
the sun until Edith can compel herself to attend to another day. Yet the
vision does not give me much pain. I think of her as an artist without
the slightest artistic power."

"The artistic temperament--" began Appleplex.

"No, not that." Eeldrop snatched away the opportunity. "I mean that what
holds the artist together is the work which he does; separate him from
his work and he either disintegrates or solidifies. There is no interest
in the artist apart from his work. And there are, as you said, those
people who provide material for the artist. Now Edith's poem 'To Atthis'
proves beyond the shadow of a doubt that she is not an artist. On the
other hand I have often thought of her, as I thought this evening, as
presenting possibilities for poetic purposes. But the people who can
be material for art must have in them something unconscious, something
which they do not fully realise or understand. Edith, in spite of what
is called her impenetrable mask, presents herself too well. I cannot use
her; she uses herself too fully. Partly for the same reason I think,
she fails to be an artist: she does not live at all upon instinct.
The artist is part of him a drifter, at the mercy of impressions, and
another part of him allows this to happen for the sake of making use of
the unhappy creature. But in Edith the division is merely the rational,
the cold and detached part of the artist, itself divided. Her material,
her experience that is, is already a mental product, already digested by
reason. Hence Edith (I only at this moment arrive at understanding)
is really the most orderly person in existence, and the most rational.
Nothing ever happens to her; everything that happens is her own doing."

"And hence also," continued Appleplex, catching up the thread, "Edith
is the least detached of all persons, since to be detached is to be
detached from one's self, to stand by and criticise coldly one's own
passions and vicissitudes. But in Edith the critic is coaching the
combatant."

"Edith is not unhappy."

"She is dissatisfied, perhaps."

"But again I say, she is not tragic: she is too rational. And in
her career there is no progression, no decline or degeneration. Her
condition is once and for always. There is and will be no catastrophe.

"But I am tired. I still wonder what Edith and Mrs. Howexden have
in common. This invites the consideration (you may not perceive the
connection) of Sets and Society, a subject which we can pursue tomorrow
night."

Appleplex looked a little embarrassed. "I am dining with Mrs. Howexden,"
he said. "But I will reflect upon the topic before I see you again."




EZRA POUND


HIS METRIC AND POETRY




BOOKS BY EZRA POUND


PROVENÇA, being poems selected from Personae, Exultations, and
Canzoniere. (Small, Maynard, Boston, 1910)

THE SPIRIT OF ROMANCE: An attempt to define somewhat the charm
of the pre-renaissance literature of Latin-Europe. (Dent,
London, 1910; and Dutton, New York)

THE SONNETS AND BALLATE OF GUIDO CAVALCANTI. (Small, Maynard,
Boston, 1912)

RIPOSTES. (Swift, London, 1912; and Mathews, London, 1913)

DES IMAGISTES: An anthology of the Imagists, Ezra Pound,
Aldington, Amy Lowell, Ford Maddox Hueffer, and others

GAUDIER-BRZESKA: A memoir. (John Lane, London and New York,
1916)

NOH: A study of the Classical Stage of Japan with Ernest
Fenollosa. (Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1917; and Macmillan,
London, 1917)

LUSTRA with Earlier Poems. (Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1917)

PAVANNES AHD DIVISIONS. (Prose. In preparation: Alfred A. Knopf,
New York)



EZRA POUND

HIS METRIC AND POETRY



I


"All talk on modern poetry, by people who know," wrote Mr. Carl
Sandburg in _Poetry_, "ends with dragging in Ezra Pound
somewhere. He may be named only to be cursed as wanton and
mocker, poseur, trifler and vagrant. Or he may be classed as
filling a niche today like that of Keats in a preceding epoch.
The point is, he will be mentioned."

This is a simple statement of fact. But though Mr. Pound is well
known, even having been the victim of interviews for Sunday
papers, it does not follow that his work is thoroughly known.
There are twenty people who have their opinion of him for every
one who has read his writings with any care. Of those twenty,
there will be some who are shocked, some who are ruffled, some
who are irritated, and one or two whose sense of dignity is
outraged. The twenty-first critic will probably be one who knows
and admires some of the poems, but who either says: "Pound is
primarily a scholar, a translator," or "Pound's early verse was
beautiful; his later work shows nothing better than the itch for
advertisement, a mischievous desire to be annoying, or a
childish desire to be original." There is a third type of
reader, rare enough, who has perceived Mr. Pound for some years,
who has followed his career intelligently, and who recognizes
its consistency.

This essay is not written for the first twenty critics of
literature, nor for that rare twenty-second who has just been
mentioned, but for the admirer of a poem here or there, whose
appreciation is capable of yielding him a larger return. If the
reader is already at the stage where he can maintain at once the
two propositions, "Pound is merely a scholar" and "Pound is
merely a yellow journalist," or the other two propositions,
"Pound is merely a technician" and "Pound is merely a prophet of
chaos," then there is very little hope. But there are readers of
poetry who have not yet reached this hypertrophy of the logical
faculty; their attention might be arrested, not by an outburst
of praise, but by a simple statement. The present essay aims
merely at such a statement. It is not intended to be either a
biographical or a critical study. It will not dilate upon
"beauties"; it is a summary account of ten years' work in
poetry. The citations from reviews will perhaps stimulate the
reader to form his own opinion. We do not wish to form it for
him. Nor shall we enter into other phases of Mr. Pound's
activity during this ten years; his writings and views on art
and music; though these would take an important place in any
comprehensive biography.



II


Pound's first book was published in Venice. Venice was a halting
point after he had left America and before he had settled in
England, and here, in 1908, "A Lume Spento" appeared. The
volume is now a rarity of literature; it was published by the
author and made at a Venetian press where the author was able
personally to supervise the printing; on paper which was a
remainder of a supply which had been used for a History of the
Church. Pound left Venice in the same year, and took "A Lume
Spento" with him to London. It was not to be expected that a
first book of verse, published by an unknown American in Venice,
should attract much attention. The "Evening Standard" has the
distinction of having noticed the volume, in a review summing it
up as:

    wild and haunting stuff, absolutely poetic, original,
    imaginative, passionate, and spiritual. Those who do not
    consider it crazy may well consider it inspired. Coming
    after the trite and decorous verse of most of our decorous
    poets, this poet seems like a minstrel of Provençe at a
    suburban musical evening.... The unseizable magic of poetry
    is in the queer paper volume, and words are no good in
    describing it.

As the chief poems in "A Lume Spento" were afterwards
incorporated in "Personae," the book demands mention only as a
date in the author's history. "Personae," the first book
published in London, followed early in 1909. Few poets have
undertaken the siege of London with so little backing; few books
of verse have ever owed their success so purely to their own
merits. Pound came to London a complete stranger, without either
literary patronage or financial means. He took "Personae" to Mr.
Elkin Mathews, who has the glory of having published Yeats'
"Wind Among the Reeds," and the "Books of the Rhymers' Club," in
which many of the poets of the '90s, now famous, found a place.
Mr. Mathews first suggested, as was natural to an unknown
author, that the author should bear part of the cost of
printing. "I have a shilling in my pocket, if that is any use to
you," said the latter. "Well," said Mr. Mathews, "I want to
publish it anyway." His acumen was justified. The book was, it
is true, received with opposition, but it was received. There
were a few appreciative critics, notably Mr. Edward Thomas, the
poet (known also as "Edward Eastaway"; he has since been killed
in France). Thomas, writing in the "English Review" (then in its
brightest days under the editorship of Ford Madox Hueffer),
recognized the first-hand intensity of feeling in "Personae":

    He has ... hardly any of the superficial good qualities of
    modern versifiers.... He has not the current melancholy or
    resignation or unwillingness to live; nor the kind of
    feeling for nature which runs to minute description and
    decorative metaphor. He cannot be usefully compared with any
    living writers;... full of personality and with such power
    to express it, that from the first to the last lines of most
    of his poems he holds us steadily in his own pure grave,
    passionate world.... The beauty of it (In Praise of Ysolt)
    is the beauty of passion, sincerity and intensity, not of
    beautiful words and images and suggestions ... the thought
    dominates the words and is greater than they are. Here
    (Idyll for Glaucus) the effect is full of human passion and
    natural magic, without any of the phrases which a reader of
    modern verse would expect in the treatment of such a
    subject.

Mr. Scott James, in the "Daily News," speaks in praise of his
metres:

    At first the whole thing may seem to be mere madness and
    rhetoric, a vain exhibition of force and passion without
    beauty. But, as we read on, these curious metres of his seem
    to have a law and order of their own; the brute force of Mr.
    Pound's imagination seems to impart some quality of
    infectious beauty to his words. Sometimes there is a strange
    beating of anapaests when he quickens to his subject; again
    and again he unexpectedly ends a line with the second half
    of a reverberant hexameter:

      "Flesh shrouded, bearing the secret."

    ... And a few lines later comes an example of his favourite
    use of spondee, followed by dactyl and spondee, which comes
    in strangely and, as we first read it, with the appearance
    of discord, but afterwards seems to gain a curious and
    distinctive vigour:

      "Eyes, dreams, lips, and the night goes."

    Another line like the end of a hexameter is

      "But if e'er I come to my love's land."

But even so favourable a critic pauses to remark that

    He baffles us by archaic words and unfamiliar metres; he
    often seems to be scorning the limitations of form and
    metre, breaking out into any sort of expression which suits
    itself to his mood.

and counsels the poet to "have a little more respect for his
art."

It is, in fact, just this adaptability of metre to mood,
an adaptability due to an intensive study of metre, that
constitutes an important element in Pound's technique. Few
readers were prepared to accept or follow the amount of
erudition which entered into "Personae" and its close successor,
"Exultations," or to devote the care to reading them which they
demand. It is here that many have been led astray. Pound is not
one of those poets who make no demand of the reader; and the
casual reader of verse, disconcerted by the difference between
Pound's poetry and that on which his taste has been trained,
attributes his own difficulties to excessive scholarship on the
part of the author. "This," he will say of some of the poems in
Provençal form or on Provençal subjects, "is archaeology; it
requires knowledge on the part of its reader, and true poetry
does not require such knowledge." But to display knowledge is
not the same thing as to expect it on the part of the reader;
and of this sort of pedantry Pound is quite free. He is, it is
true, one of the most learned of poets. In America he had taken
up the study of Romance Languages with the intention of
teaching. After work in Spain and Italy, after pursuing the
Provençal verb from Milan to Freiburg, he deserted the thesis
on Lope de Vega and the Ph.D. and the professorial chair,
and elected to remain in Europe. Mr. Pound has spoken out
his mind from time to time on the subject of scholarship in
American universities, its deadness, its isolation from genuine
appreciation, and the active creative life of literature. He has
always been ready to battle against pedantry. As for his own
learning, he has studied poetry carefully, and has made use of
his study in his own verse. "Personae" and "Exultations"
show his talent for turning his studies to account. He was
supersaturated in Provençe; he had tramped over most of the
country; and the life of the courts where the Troubadours
thronged was part of his own life to him. Yet, though "Personae"
and "Exultations" do exact something from the reader, they do
not require a knowledge of Provençal or of Spanish or Italian.
Very few people know the Arthurian legends well, or even Malory
(if they did they might realize that the Idylls of the King are
hardly more important than a parody, or a "Chaucer retold for
Children"); but no one accuses Tennyson of needing footnotes, or
of superciliousness toward the uninstructed. The difference is
merely in what people are prepared for; most readers could no
more relate the myth of Atys correctly than they could give a
biography of Bertrand de Born. It is hardly too much to say that
there is no poem in these volumes of Mr. Pound which needs
fuller explanation than he gives himself. What the poems do
require is a trained ear, or at least the willingness to be
trained.

The metres and the use of language are unfamiliar. There are
certain traces of modern influence. We cannot agree with Mr.
Scott-James that among these are "W. E. Henley, Kipling,
Chatterton, and especially Walt Whitman"--least of all Walt
Whitman. Probably there are only two: Yeats and Browning. Yeats
in "La Fraisne," in "Personae," for instance, in the attitude
and somewhat in the vocabulary:

  I wrapped my tears in an ellum leaf
  And left them under a stone,
  And now men call me mad because I have thrown
  All folly from me, putting it aside
  To leave the old barren ways of men ...

For Browning, Mr. Pound has always professed strong admiration
(see "Mesmerism" in "Personae"); there are traces of him in
"Cino" and "Famam Librosque Cano," in the same volume. But it is
more profitable to comment upon the variety of metres and the
original use of language.

Ezra Pound has been fathered with vers libre in English, with
all its vices and virtues. The term is a loose one--any verse is
called "free" by people whose ears are not accustomed to it--in
the second place, Pound's use of this medium has shown the
temperance of the artist, and his belief in it as a vehicle is
not that of the fanatic. He has said himself that when one has
the proper material for a sonnet, one should use the sonnet
form; but that it happens very rarely to any poet to find
himself in possession of just the block of stuff which can
perfectly be modelled into the sonnet. It is true that up to
very recently it was impossible to get free verse printed in any
periodical except those in which Pound had influence; and
that now it is possible to print free verse (second, third, or
tenth-rate) in almost any American magazine. Who is responsible
for the bad free verse is a question of no importance, inasmuch
as its authors would have written bad verse in any form; Pound
has at least the right to be judged by the success or failure of
his own. Pound's vers libre is such as is only possible for a
poet who has worked tirelessly with rigid forms and different
systems of metric. His "Canzoni" are in a way aside from his
direct line of progress; they are much more nearly studies in
mediaeval appreciation than any of his other verse; but they are
interesting, apart from their merit, as showing the poet at work
with the most intricate Provençal forms--so intricate that the
pattern cannot be exhibited without quoting an entire poem. (M.
Jean de Bosschere, whose French is translated in the "Egoist,"
has already called attention to the fact that Pound was the
first writer in English to use five Provençal forms.) Quotation
will show, however, the great variety of rhythm which Pound
manages to introduce into the ordinary iambic pentameter:

  Thy gracious ways,
                    O lady of my heart, have
  O'er all my thought their golden glamour cast;
  As amber torch-flames, where strange men-at-arms
  Tread softly 'neath the damask shield of night,
  Rise from the flowing steel in part reflected,
  So on my mailed thought that with thee goeth,
  Though dark the way, a golden glamour falleth.

Within the iambic limits, there are no two lines in the whole
poem that have an identical rhythm.

We turn from this to a poem in "Exultations," the "Night
Litany":

  O God, what great kindness
            have we done in times past
            and forgotten it,
  That thou givest this wonder unto us,
            O God of waters?

  O God of the night
            What great sorrow
  Cometh unto us,
            That thou thus repayest us
  Before the time of its coming?

There is evident, and more strongly in certain later poems, a
tendency toward quantitative measure. Such a "freedom" as this
lays so heavy a burden upon every word in a line that it becomes
impossible to write like Shelley, leaving blanks for the
adjectives, or like Swinburne, whose adjectives are practically
blanks. Other poets have manipulated a great variety of metres
and forms; but few have studied the forms and metres which they
use so carefully as has Pound. His ballad of the "Goodly Fere"
shows great knowledge of the ballad form:

  I ha' seen him cow a thousand men
  On the hills o' Galilee,
  They whined as he walked out calm between
  Wi' his eyes like the grey o' the sea.

  Like the sea that brooks no voyaging
  With the winds unleashed and free,
  Like the sea that he cowed at Genseret
  Wi' twey words spoke suddently.

  A master of men was the Goodly Fere
  A mate of the wind and sea,
  If they think they ha' slain our Goodly Fere
  They are fools eternally.

  I ha' seen him eat o' the honey-comb
  Sin' they nailed him to the tree.

And from this we turn to a very different form in the
"Altaforte," which is perhaps the best sestina that has
been written in English:

  Damn it all! all this our South stinks peace.
  You whoreson dog, Papiols, come! let's to music!
  I have no life save when the swords clash.
  But ah! when I see the standards gold, vair, purple, opposing,
  And the broad fields beneath them turn crimson,
  Then howl I my heart nigh mad with rejoicing.

  In hot summer have I great rejoicing
  When the tempests kill the earth's foul peace,
  And the lightnings from black heaven flash crimson,
  And the fierce thunders roar me their music
  And the winds  shriek through the clouds mad, opposing,
  And through all the riven skies God's swords clash.

I have quoted two verses to show the intricacy of the pattern.

The Provençal canzon, like the Elizabethan lyric, was written
for music. Mr. Pound has more recently insisted, in a series of
articles on the work of Arnold Dolmetsch, in the "Egoist," on
the importance of a study of music for the poet.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such a relation between poetry and music is very different from
what is called the "music" of Shelley or Swinburne, a music
often nearer to rhetoric (or the art of the orator) than to the
instrument. For poetry to approach the condition of music
(Pound quotes approvingly the dictum of Pater) it is not
necessary that poetry should be destitute of meaning. Instead of
slightly veiled and resonant abstractions, like

  Time with a gift of tears,
  Grief with a glass that ran--

of Swinburne, or the mossiness of Mallarmé, Pound's verse is
always definite and concrete, because he has always a definite
emotion behind it.

  Though I've roamed through many places,
  None there is that my heart troweth
  Fair as that wherein fair groweth
  One whose laud here interlaces
  Tuneful words, that I've essayed.
  Let this tune be gently played
  Which my voice herward upraises.

At the end of this poem the author appends the note:

    The form and measure are those of Piere Vidal's "_Ab
    l'alen tir vas me l'aire_." The song is fit only to be
    sung, and is not to be spoken.

There are, here and there, deliberate archaisms or oddities
(e.g., "herward"); there are deliberately arbitrary images,
having their place in the total effect of the poem:


  Red leaf that art blown upward and out and over
  The green sheaf of the world ...

  The lotos that pours
  Her fragrance into the purple cup ...

  Black lightning ... (in a more recent poem)

but no word is ever chosen merely for the tinkle; each has
always its part in producing an impression which is produced
always through language. Words are perhaps the hardest of
all material of art: for they must be used to express both
visual beauty and beauty of sound, as well as communicating
a grammatical statement. It would be interesting to compare
Pound's use of images with Mallarmé's; I think it will be found
that the former's, by the contrast, will appear always sharp in
outline, even if arbitrary and not photographic. Such images as
those quoted above are as precise in their way as

  Sur le Noel, morte saison,
  Lorsque les loups vivent de vent ...

and the rest of that memorable Testament.

So much for the imagery. As to the "freedom" of his verse, Pound
has made several statements in his articles on Dolmetsch which
are to the point:

    Any work of art is a compound of freedom and order. It is
    perfectly obvious that art hangs between chaos on the one
    side and mechanics on the other. A pedantic insistence upon
    detail tends to drive out "major form." A firm hold on major
    form makes for a freedom of detail. In painting men intent
    on minutiae gradually lost the sense of form and form-
    combination. An attempt to restore this sense is branded as
    "revolution." It is revolution in the philological sense of
    the term....

    Art is a departure from fixed positions; felicitous
    departure from a norm....

The freedom of Pound's verse is rather a state of tension due to
constant opposition between free and strict. There are not, as a
matter of fact, two kinds of verse, the strict and the free;
there is only a mastery which comes of being so well trained
that form is an instinct and can be adapted to the particular
purpose in hand.

       *       *      *       *       *

After "Exultations" came the translation of the "Sonnets and
Ballate of Guido Cavalcanti." It is worth noting that the writer
of a long review in the "_Quest_"--speaking in praise of the
translation, yet found fault with the author not on the ground
of excessive mediaevalism, but because

    he is concerned rather with the future than with a somewhat
    remote past, so that in spite of his love for the mediaeval
    poets, his very accomplishment as a distinctly modern poet
    makes against his success as a wholly acceptable translator
    of Cavalcanti, the heir of the Troubadours, the scholastic.

Yet the _Daily News_, in criticising "Canzoni," had remarked
that Mr. Pound

    seems to us rather a scholar than a poet, and we should like
    to see him giving his unusual talent more to direct
    translation from the Provençal.

and Mr. J. C. Squire (now the literary editor of the _New
Statesman_), in an appreciative review in the _New Age_, had
counselled the poet that he would

    gain and not lose if he could forget all about the poets of
    Dante's day, their roses and their flames, their gold and
    their falcons, and their literary amorousness, and walk out
    of the library into the fresh air.

In "Ripostes" there are traces of a different idiom.
Superficially, the work may appear less important. The diction
is more restrained, the flights shorter, the dexterity of
technique is less arresting. By romantic readers the book would
be considered less "passionate." But there is a much more solid
substratum to this book; there is more thought; greater depth,
if less agitation on the surface. The effect of London is
apparent; the author has become a critic of men, surveying them
from a consistent and developed point of view; he is more
formidable and disconcerting; in short, much more mature.
That he abandons nothing of his technical skill is evident from
the translation from the Anglo-Saxon, the "Seafarer." It is
not a slight achievement to have brought to life alliterative
verse: perhaps the "Seafarer" is the only successful piece of
alliterative verse ever written in modern English; alliterative
verse which is not merely a clever tour de force, but which
suggests the possibility of a new development of this form. Mr.
Richard Aldington (whose own accomplishments as a writer of vers
libre qualify him to speak) called the poem "unsurpassed and
unsurpassable," and a writer in the _New Age_ (a literary organ
which has always been strongly opposed to metrical innovations)
called it "one of the finest literary works of art produced in
England during the last ten years." And the rough, stern beauty
of the Anglo-Saxon, we may remark, is at the opposite pole from
that of the Provençal and Italian poets to whom Pound had
previously devoted his attention.

  May I for my own self song's truth reckon,
  Journey's jargon, how I in harsh days
  Hardship endured oft.

But we can notice in "Ripostes" other evidences than of
versatility only; certain poems show Mr. Pound turning to more
modern subjects, as in the "Portrait d'une femme," or the
mordant epigram, "An Object." Many readers are apt to confuse
the maturing of personality with desiccation of the emotions.
There is no desiccation in "Ripostes." This should be evident to
anyone who reads carefully such a poem as "A Girl." We quote it
entire without comment.

  The tree has entered my hands,
  The sap has ascended my arms,
  The tree has grown in my breast--
  Downward,
  The branches grow out of me, like arms.

  Tree you are,
  Moss you are,
  You are violets with wind above them.
  A child--_so_ high--you are,
  And all this is folly to the world.

"The Return" is an important study in verse which is really
quantitative. We quote only a few lines:

  See, they return; ah, see the tentative
  Movements, and the slow feet,
  The trouble in the pace and the uncertain
  Wavering!

"Ripostes" belongs to the period when Mr. Pound was being
attacked because of his propaganda. He became known as the
inventor of "Imagism," and later, as the "High Priest of
Vorticism." As a matter of fact, the actual "propaganda" of Mr.
Pound has been very small in quantity. The impression which his
personality made, however, is suggested by the following note in
"_Punch_," which is always a pretty reliable barometer of the
English middle-class Grin:

    Mr. Welkin Mark (exactly opposite Long Jane's) begs to
    announce that he has secured for the English market the
    palpitating works of the new Montana (U.S.A.) poet, Mr.
    Ezekiel Ton, who is the most remarkable thing in poetry
    since Robert Browning. Mr. Ton, who has left America to
    reside for a while in London and impress his personality on
    English editors, publishers and readers, is by far the
    newest poet going, whatever other advertisements may say. He
    has succeeded, where all others have failed, in evolving a
    blend of the imagery of the unfettered West, the vocabulary
    of Wardour Street, and the sinister abandon of Borgiac
    Italy.

In 1913, someone writing to the New York _Nation_ from the
University of Illinois, illustrates the American, more serious,
disapproval. This writer begins by expressing his objections to
the "principle of Futurism." (Pound has perhaps done more than
anyone to keep Futurism out of England. His antagonism to this
movement was the first which was not due merely to unintelligent
dislike for anything new, and was due to his perception that
Futurism was incompatible with any principles of form. In his
own words, Futurism is "accelerated impressionism.") The writer
in the _Nation_ then goes on to analyze the modern "hypertrophy
of romanticism" into

  The exaggeration of the importance of a personal emotion.
  The abandonment of all standards of form.
  The suppression of all evidence that a particular composition
  is animated by any directing intelligence.

As for the first point, here are Mr. Pound's words in answer to
the question, "do you agree that the great poet is never
emotional?"

    Yes, absolutely; if by emotion is meant that he is at the
    mercy of every passing mood.... The only kind of emotion
    worthy of a poet is the inspirational emotion which
    energises and strengthens, and which is very remote from the
    everyday emotion of sloppiness and sentiment....

And as for the platform of Imagism, here are a few of Pound's
"Don'ts for Imagists":

    Pay no attention to the criticisms of men who have never
    themselves written a notable work.

    Use no superfluous word and no adjective which does not
    reveal something.

    Go in fear of abstractions. Don't retail in mediocre verse
    what has already been done in good prose.

    Don't imagine that the art of poetry is any simpler than the
    art of music or that you can please the expert before you
    have spent at least as much effort on the art of verse as
    the average piano teacher spends on the art of music.

    Be influenced by as many great artists as you can, but have
    the decency either to acknowledge the debt outright or try
    to conceal it.

    Consider the definiteness of Dante's presentation as
    compared with Milton's. Read as much of Wordsworth as does
    not seem to be unutterably dull.

    If you want the gist of the matter go to Sappho, Catullus,
    Villon when he is in the vein, Gautier when he is not too
    frigid, or if yon have not the tongues seek out the
    leisurely Chaucer.

    Good prose will do you no harm. There is good discipline to
    be had by trying to write it. Translation is also good
    training.

The emphasis here is certainly on discipline and form. The
Chicago _Tribune_ recognized this as "sound sense," adding:

    If this is Imagism ... we are for establishing Imagism by
    constitutional amendment and imprisoning without recourse to
    ink or paper all "literary" ladies or gents who break any of
    these canons.

But other reviewers were less approving. While the writer in the
_Nation_, quoted above, dreads the anarchy impending, Mr.
William Archer was terrified at the prospect of hieratic
formalisation. Mr. Archer believes in the simple untaught muse:

    Mr. Pound's commandments tend too much to make of poetry a
    learned, self-conscious craft, to be cultivated by a guild
    of adepts, from whose austere laboratories spontaneity and
    simplicity are excluded.... A great deal of the best poetry
    in the world has very little technical study behind it....
    There are scores and hundreds of people in England who could
    write this simple metre (i.e. of "A Shropshire Lad")
    successfully.

To be hanged for a cat and drowned for a rat is, perhaps,
sufficient exculpation.

Probably Mr. Pound has won odium not so much by his theories as
by his unstinted praise of certain contemporary authors whose
work he has liked. Such expressions of approval are usually
taken as a grievance--much more so than any personal abuse,
which is comparatively a compliment--by the writers who escape
his mention. He does not say "A., B., and C. are bad poets or
novelists," but when he says "The work of X., Y., and Z. is in
such and such respects the most important work in verse (or
prose) since so and so," then A., B., and C. are aggrieved.
Also, Pound has frequently expressed disapproval of Milton and
Wordsworth.

After "Ripostes," Mr. Pound's idiom has advanced still farther.
Inasmuch as "Cathay," the volume of translations from the
Chinese, appeared prior to "Lustra," it is sometimes thought
that his newer idiom is due to the Chinese influence. This is
almost the reverse of the truth. The late Ernest Fenollosa left
a quantity of manuscripts, including a great number of rough
translations (literally exact) from the Chinese. After certain
poems subsequently incorporated in "Lustra" had appeared in
"Poetry," Mrs. Fenollosa recognized that in Pound the Chinese
manuscripts would find the interpreter whom her husband would
have wished; she accordingly forwarded the papers for him to do
as he liked with. It is thus due to Mrs. Fenollosa's acumen that
we have "Cathay"; it is not as a consequence of "Cathay" that we
have "Lustra." This fact must be borne in mind.

Poems afterward embodied in "Lustra" appeared in "Poetry," in
April, 1913, under the title of "Contemporanea." They included
among others "Tenzone," "The Condolence," "The Garret,"
"Salutation the Second," and "Dance Figure."

There are influences, but deviously. It is rather a gradual
development of experience into which literary experiences have
entered. These have not brought the bondage of temporary
enthusiasms, but have liberated the poet from his former
restricted sphere. There is Catullus and Martial, Gautier,
Laforgue and Tristan Corbière. Whitman is certainly not an
influence; there is not a trace of him anywhere; Whitman and Mr.
Pound are antipodean to each other. Of "Contemporanea" the
_Chicago Evening Post_ discriminatingly observed:

    Your poems in the April _Poetry_ are so mockingly, so
    delicately, so unblushingly beautiful that you seem to have
    brought back into the world a grace which (probably) never
    existed, but which we discover by an imaginative process in
    Horace and Catullus.

It was a true insight to ally Pound to the Latin, not to the
Greek poets.

Certain of the poems in "Lustra" have offended admirers of the
verse of the "Personae" period. When a poet alters or develops,
many of his admirers are sure to drop off. Any poet, if he is to
survive as a writer beyond his twenty-fifth year, must alter; he
must seek new literary influences; he will have different
emotions to express. This is disconcerting to that public which
likes a poet to spin his whole work out of the feelings of his
youth; which likes to be able to open a new volume of his poems
with the assurance that they will be able to approach it exactly
as they approached the preceding. They do not like that constant
readjustment which the following of Mr. Pound's work demands.
Thus has "Lustra" been a disappointment to some; though it
manifests no falling off in technique, and no impoverishment
of feeling. Some of the poems (including several of the
"Contemporanea") are a more direct statement of views than
Pound's verse had ever given before. Of these poems, M. Jean de
Bosschère writes:

    Everywhere his poems incite man to exist, to profess a
    becoming egotism, without which there can be no real
    altruism.

      I beseech you enter your life.
      I beseech you learn to say "I"
      When I question you.
      For you are no part, but a whole;
      No portion, but a being.

    ... One must be capable of reacting to stimuli for a moment,
    as a real, live person, even in face of as much of one's own
    powers as are arrayed against one;... The virile complaint,
    the revolt of the poet, all which shows his emotion,--that
    is poetry.

      Speak against unconscious oppression,
      Speak against the tyranny of the unimaginative,
      Speak against bonds.

        Be against all forms of oppression,
        Go out and defy opinion.

    This is the old cry of the poet, but more precise, as an
    expression of frank disgust:

      Go to the adolescent who are smothered in family.
      O, how hideous it is
      To see three generations of one house gathered together!
      It is like an old tree without shoots,
      And with some branches rotted and falling.

    Each poem holds out these cries of revolt or disgust, but
    they are the result of his still hoping and feeling:

    Let us take arms against this sea of stupidities. Pound ...
    has experience of the folly of the Philistines who read his
    verse. Real pain is born of this stupid interpretation, and
    one does not realize how deep it is unless one can feel,
    through the ejaculations and the laughter, what has caused
    these wounds, which are made deeper by what he knows, and
    what he has lost....

    The tone, which is at once jocund and keen, is one of
    Pound's qualities. Ovid, Catullus--he does not disown them.
    He only uses these accents for his familiars; with the
    others he is on the edge of paradox, pamphleteering, indeed
    of abuse....

This is the proper approach to the poems at the beginning of
"Lustra," and to the short epigrams, which some readers find
"pointless," or certainly "not poetry." They should read, then,
the "Dance Figure," or "Near Périgord," and remember that all
these poems come out of the same man.

  Thine arms are as a young sapling under the bark;
  Thy face as a river with lights.

  White as an almond are thy shoulders;
  As new almonds stripped from the husk.

Or the ending of "Near Périgord":

  Bewildering spring, and by the Auvezère
  Poppies and day's-eyes in the green émail
  Rose over us; and we knew all that stream,
  And our two horses had traced out the valleys;
  Knew the low flooded lands squared out with poplars,
  In the young days when the deep sky befriended.
  And great wings beat above us in the twilight,
  And the great wheels in heaven
  Bore us together ... surging ... and apart ...
  Believing we should meet with lips and hands ...

  There shut up in his castle, Tairiran's,
  She who had nor ears nor tongue save in her hands,
  Gone, ah, gone--untouched, unreachable!
  She who could never live save through one person,
  She who could never speak save to one person,
  And all the rest of her a shifting change,
  A broken bundle of mirrors...!


Then turn at once to "To a Friend Writing on Cabaret Dancers."

It is easy to say that the language of "Cathay" is due to the
Chinese. If one looks carefully at (1) Pound's other verse, (2)
other people's translations from the Chinese (e.g., Giles's), it
is evident that this is not the case. The language was ready for
the Chinese poetry. Compare, for instance, a passage from
"Provincia Deserta":

  I have walked
               into Périgord
  I have seen the torch-flames, high-leaping,
  Painting the front of that church,--
  And, under the dark, whirling laughter,
  I have looked back over the stream
               and seen the high building,
  Seen the long minarets, the white shafts.
  I have gone in Ribeyrac,
               and in Sarlat.
  I have climbed rickety stairs, heard talk of Croy,
  Walked over En Bertran's old layout,
  Have seen Narbonne, and Cahors and Chalus,
  Have seen Excideuil, carefully fashioned.

with a passage from "The River Song":

  He goes out to Hori, to look at the wing-flapping storks,
  He returns by way of Sei rock, to hear the new nightingales,
  For the gardens at Jo-run are full of new nightingales,
  Their sound is mixed in this flute,
  Their voice is in the twelve pipes here.

It matters very little how much is due to Rihaku and how much to
Pound. Mr. Ford Madox Hueffer has observed: "If these are
original verses, then Mr. Pound is the greatest poet of this
day." He goes on to say:

    The poems in "Cathay" are things of a supreme beauty. What
    poetry should be, that they are. And if a new breath of
    imagery and handling can do anything for our poetry, that
    new breath these poems bring....

    Poetry consists in so rendering concrete objects that the
    emotions produced by the objects shall arise in the
    reader....

    Where have you better rendered, or more permanently
    beautiful a rendering of, the feelings of one of those
    lonely watchers, in the outposts of progress, whether it be
    Ovid in Hyrcania, a Roman sentinel upon the great wall of
    this country, or merely ourselves, in the lonely recesses of
    our minds, than the "Lament of the Frontier Guard"?...

    Beauty is a very valuable thing; perhaps it is the most
    valuable thing in life; but the power to express emotion so
    that it shall communicate itself intact and exactly is
    almost more valuable. Of both these qualities Mr. Pound's
    book is very full. Therefore, I think we may say that this
    is much the best work he has done, for, however closely he
    may have followed his originals--and of that most of us have
    no means of judging--there is certainly a good deal of Mr.
    Pound in this little volume.

"Cathay" and "Lustra" were followed by the translations of Noh
plays. The Noh are not so important as the Chinese poems
(certainly not so important for English); the attitude is less
unusual to us; the work is not so solid, so firm. "Cathay" will,
I believe, rank with the "Sea-Farer" in the future among Mr.
Pound's original work; the Noh will rank among his translations.
It is rather a dessert after "Cathay." There are, however,
passages which, as Pound has handled them, are different both
from the Chinese and from anything existent in English. There
is, for example, the fine speech of the old Kagekiyo, as he
thinks of his youthful valour:

    He thought, how easy this killing. He rushed with his
    spearshaft gripped under his arm. He cried out, "I am
    Kagekiyo of the Heike." He rushed on to take them. He
    pierced through the helmet vizards of Miyanoya. Miyanoya
    fled twice, and again; and Kagekiyo cried: "You shall not
    escape me!" He leaped and wrenched off his helmet. "Eya!"
    The vizard broke and remained in his hand, and Miyanoya
    still fled afar, and afar, and he looked back crying in
    terror, "How terrible, how heavy your arm!" And Kagekiyo
    called at him, "How tough the shaft of your neck is!" And
    they both laughed out over the battle, and went off each his
    own way.

The "Times Literary Supplement" spoke of Mr. Pound's "mastery of
beautiful diction" and his "cunningly rhythmically prose," in
its review of the "Noh."

Even since "Lustra," Mr. Pound has moved again. This move is to
the epic, of which three cantos appear in the American "Lustra"
(they have already appeared in "Poetry"--Miss Monroe deserves
great honour for her courage in printing an epic poem in this
twentieth century--but the version in "Lustra" is revised and is
improved by revision). We will leave it as a test: when anyone
has studied Mr. Pound's poems in _chronological_ order, and has
mastered "Lustra" and "Cathay," he is prepared for the Cantos--
but not till then. If the reader then fails to like them, he has
probably omitted some step in his progress, and had better go
back and retrace the journey.




BIBLIOGRAPHY OF

BOOKS AND PARTIAL BIBLIOGRAPHY OF
NOTABLE CRITICAL ARTICLES

BY EZRA POUND



POEMS


A LUME SPENTO (100 copies). Antonelli, Venice, June, 1908.

A QUINZAINE FOR THIS YULE.
  First 100 printed by Pollock, London, December, 1908.

  Second 100 published under Elkin Mathews' imprint, London,
    December, 1908.

PERSONAE. Mathews, London, Spring, 1909.

EXULTATIONS. Mathews, London, Autumn, 1909.



PROSE


THE SPIRIT OF ROMANCE. Dent, London, 1910.



POEMS


PROVENÇA (a selection of poems from "Personae" and
  "Exultations" with new poems). Small Maynard, Boston, 1910.

CANZONI. Mathews, London, 1911.

THE SONNETS AND BALLATE OF GUIDO CAVALCANTI (translated).
  Small Maynard, Boston, 1912.

  A cheaper edition of the same, Swift and Co., London, 1912.
  The bulk of this edition destroyed by fire.

RIPOSTES. Swift, London, 1912.
  (_Note_.--This book contains the first announcement of
  Imagism, in the foreword to the poems of T. E. Hulme.)



OTHER PUBLICATIONS


"A FEW DON'TS BY AN IMAGISTE," in "Poetry," for March, 1913.

"CONTEMPORANIA" (poems), in "Poetry," April, 1913.



POEMS


PERSONAE, EXULTATIONS, CANZONI, RIPOSTES, published in two
  volumes. Mathews, London, 1913.

FIRST OF THE NOTES ON JAMES JOYCE, "Egoist," January, 1914.

FIRST OF THE ARTICLES CONCERNING GAUDIER-BRZESKA, "Egoist,"
  February, 1914.



OTHER PUBLICATIONS


"DES IMAGISTES," poems by several authors selected by Ezra
  Pound, published as a number of "The Glebe," in New York.
  February, 1914.

  Alfred Kreymborg was at this time editor of "The Glebe." The
  first arrangements for the anthology were made through the
  kind offices of John Cournos during the winter of 1912-13.

  The English edition of this anthology published by The Poetry
  Book Shop. London, 1914.

ARTICLE ON WYNDHAM LEWIS, "Egoist," June 15, 1914.

CONTRIBUTIONS TO FIRST NUMBER OF "Blast," June 20, 1914.

"VORTICISM," an article in "The Fortnightly Review," September,
  1914.

"GAUDIER-BRZESKA," an article in "The New Age," February 4,
  1915.

CONTRIBUTIONS to second number of "Blast," 1915.



POEMS


CATHAY. Mathews, London, April, 1915. (Translations from the
  Chinese from the notes of Ernest Fenollosa.)



OTHER PUBLICATIONS


THE CATHOLIC ANTHOLOGY, edited by Ezra Pound. Mathews, London,
  December, 1915.

GAUDIER-BRZESKA, a memoir. John Lane, London and New York, 1916.

LUSTRA (poems) public edition, pp. 116. Mathews, London, 1916.
  200 copies privately printed and numbered, pp. 124.

CERTAIN NOBLE PLAYS OF JAPAN. Cuala Press, Dundrum, Ireland,
  1916. Translated by Ernest Fenollosa and Ezra Pound, with an
  introduction by William Butler Yeats.

NOH, or Accomplishment. A study of the Classical Stage of
  Japan, including translations of fifteen plays, by Ernest
  Fenollosa and Ezra Pound. Macmillan, London, 1917. Knopf, New
  York, 1917.

PASSAGES FROM THE LETTERS OF JOHN BUTLER YEATS, selected by Ezra
  Pound, with brief editorial note. Cuala Press, 1917.

LUSTRA, with Earlier Poems, Knopf, New York, 1917. (This
  collection of Mr. Pound's poems contains all that he now
  thinks fit to republish.)

  There is also a privately-printed edition of fifty copies,
  with a reproduction of a drawing of Ezra Pound by Henri
  Gaudier-Brzeska (New York, 1917).

PAVANNES and DIVISIONS (Prose), in preparation. Knopf,
  New York.






POEMS

by T. S. ELIOT


New York Alfred A. Knopf 1920


             To Jean Verdenal 1889-1915


Certain of these poems first appeared in Poetry, Blast, Others, The
Little Review, and Art and Letters.



CONTENTS

     Gerontion
     Burbank with a Baedeker: Bleistein with a Cigar
     Sweeney Erect
     A Cooking Egg
     Le Directeur
     Mélange adultère de tout
     Lune de Miel
     The Hippopotamus
     Dans le Restaurant
     Whispers of Immortality
     Mr. Eliot's Sunday Morning Service
     Sweeney Among the Nightingales
     The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock
     Portrait of a Lady
     Preludes
     Rhapsody on a Windy Night
     Morning at the Window
     The Boston Evening Transcript
     Aunt Helen
     Cousin Nancy
     Mr. Apollinax
     Hysteria
     Conversation Galante
     La Figlia Che Pianga




POEMS



Gerontion

       Thou hast nor youth nor age
       But as it were an after dinner sleep
       Dreaming of both.


     Here I am, an old man in a dry month,
     Being read to by a boy, waiting for rain.
     I was neither at the hot gates
     Nor fought in the warm rain
     Nor knee deep in the salt marsh, heaving a cutlass,
     Bitten by flies, fought.
     My house is a decayed house,
     And the jew squats on the window sill, the owner,
     Spawned in some estaminet of Antwerp,
     Blistered in Brussels, patched and peeled in London.
     The goat coughs at night in the field overhead;
     Rocks, moss, stonecrop, iron, merds.
     The woman keeps the kitchen, makes tea,
     Sneezes at evening, poking the peevish gutter.

                       I an old man,
     A dull head among windy spaces.

     Signs are taken for wonders. "We would see a sign":
     The word within a word, unable to speak a word,
     Swaddled with darkness. In the juvescence of the year
     Came Christ the tiger

     In depraved May, dogwood and chestnut, flowering Judas,
     To be eaten, to be divided, to be drunk
     Among whispers; by Mr. Silvero
     With caressing hands, at Limoges
     Who walked all night in the next room;
     By Hakagawa, bowing among the Titians;
     By Madame de Tornquist, in the dark room
     Shifting the candles; Fraulein von Kulp
     Who turned in the hall, one hand on the door. Vacant shuttles
     Weave the wind. I have no ghosts,
     An old man in a draughty house
     Under a windy knob.

     After such knowledge, what forgiveness? Think now
     History has many cunning passages, contrived corridors
     And issues, deceives with whispering ambitions,
     Guides us by vanities. Think now
     She gives when our attention is distracted
     And what she gives, gives with such supple confusions
     That the giving famishes the craving. Gives too late
     What's not believed in, or if still believed,
     In memory only, reconsidered passion. Gives too soon
     Into weak hands, what's thought can be dispensed with
     Till the refusal propagates a fear. Think
     Neither fear nor courage saves us. Unnatural vices
     Are fathered by our heroism. Virtues
     Are forced upon us by our impudent crimes.
     These tears are shaken from the wrath-bearing tree.

     The tiger springs in the new year. Us he devours. Think at last
     We have not reached conclusion, when I
     Stiffen in a rented house. Think at last
     I have not made this show purposelessly
     And it is not by any concitation
     Of the backward devils.
     I would meet you upon this honestly.
     I that was near your heart was removed therefrom
     To lose beauty in terror, terror in inquisition.
     I have lost my passion: why should I need to keep it
     Since what is kept must be adulterated?
     I have lost my sight, smell, hearing, taste and touch:
     How should I use it for your closer contact?

     These with a thousand small deliberations
     Protract the profit of their chilled delirium,
     Excite the membrane, when the sense has cooled,
     With pungent sauces, multiply variety
     In a wilderness of mirrors. What will the spider do,
     Suspend its operations, will the weevil
     Delay? De Bailhache, Fresca, Mrs. Cammel, whirled
     Beyond the circuit of the shuddering Bear
     In fractured atoms. Gull against the wind, in the windy straits
     Of Belle Isle, or running on the Horn,
     White feathers in the snow, the Gulf claims,
     And an old man driven by the Trades
     To a sleepy corner.

                       Tenants of the house,
     Thoughts of a dry brain in a dry season.




Burbank with a Baedeker: Bleistein with a Cigar

       Tra-la-la-la-la-la-laire--nil nisi divinum stabile
       est; caetera fumus--the gondola stopped, the old
       palace was there, how charming its grey and pink--
       goats and monkeys, with such hair too!--so the
       countess passed on until she came through the
       little park, where Niobe presented her with a
       cabinet, and so departed.


     Burbank crossed a little bridge
     Descending at a small hotel;
     Princess Volupine arrived,
     They were together, and he fell.

     Defunctive music under sea
     Passed seaward with the passing bell
     Slowly: the God Hercules
     Had left him, that had loved him well.

     The horses, under the axletree
     Beat up the dawn from Istria
     With even feet. Her shuttered barge
     Burned on the water all the day.

     But this or such was Bleistein's way:
     A saggy bending of the knees
     And elbows, with the palms turned out,
     Chicago Semite Viennese.

     A lustreless protrusive eye
     Stares from the protozoic slime
     At a perspective of Canaletto.
     The smoky candle end of time

     Declines. On the Rialto once.
     The rats are underneath the piles.
     The jew is underneath the lot.
     Money in furs. The boatman smiles,

     Princess Volupine extends
     A meagre, blue-nailed, phthisic hand
     To climb the waterstair. Lights, lights,
     She entertains Sir Ferdinand

     Klein. Who clipped the lion's wings
     And flea'd his rump and pared his claws?
     Thought Burbank, meditating on
     Time's ruins, and the seven laws.




Sweeney Erect

                           And the trees about me,
       Let them be dry and leafless; let the rocks
       Groan with continual surges; and behind me
       Make all a desolation. Look, look, wenches!


     Paint me a cavernous waste shore
     Cast in the unstilted Cyclades,
     Paint me the bold anfractuous rocks
     Faced by the snarled and yelping seas.

     Display me Aeolus above
     Reviewing the insurgent gales
     Which tangle Ariadne's hair
     And swell with haste the perjured sails.

     Morning stirs the feet and hands
     (Nausicaa and Polypheme),
     Gesture of orang-outang
     Rises from the sheets in steam.

     This withered root of knots of hair
     Slitted below and gashed with eyes,
     This oval O cropped out with teeth:
     The sickle motion from the thighs

     Jackknifes upward at the knees
     Then straightens out from heel to hip
     Pushing the framework of the bed
     And clawing at the pillow slip.

     Sweeney addressed full length to shave
     Broadbottomed, pink from nape to base,
     Knows the female temperament
     And wipes the suds around his face.

     (The lengthened shadow of a man
     Is history, said Emerson
     Who had not seen the silhouette
     Of Sweeney straddled in the sun).

     Tests the razor on his leg
     Waiting until the shriek subsides.
     The epileptic on the bed
     Curves backward, clutching at her sides.

     The ladies of the corridor
     Find themselves involved, disgraced,
     Call witness to their principles
     And deprecate the lack of taste

     Observing that hysteria
     Might easily be misunderstood;
     Mrs. Turner intimates
     It does the house no sort of good.

     But Doris, towelled from the bath,
     Enters padding on broad feet,
     Bringing sal volatile
     And a glass of brandy neat.




A Cooking Egg

       En l'an trentiesme de mon aage
       Que toutes mes hontes j'ay beues...


     Pipit sate upright in her chair
       Some distance from where I was sitting;
     Views of the Oxford Colleges
       Lay on the table, with the knitting.

     Daguerreotypes and silhouettes,
       Her grandfather and great great aunts,
     Supported on the mantelpiece
       An Invitation to the Dance.
      .    .    .    .    .    .
     I shall not want Honour in Heaven
       For I shall meet Sir Philip Sidney
     And have talk with Coriolanus
       And other heroes of that kidney.

     I shall not want Capital in Heaven
       For I shall meet Sir Alfred Mond:
     We two shall lie together, lapt
       In a five per cent Exchequer Bond.

     I shall not want Society in Heaven,
       Lucretia Borgia shall be my Bride;
     Her anecdotes will be more amusing
       Than Pipit's experience could provide.

     I shall not want Pipit in Heaven:
       Madame Blavatsky will instruct me
     In the Seven Sacred Trances;
       Piccarda de Donati will conduct me.

      .    .    .    .    .    .

     But where is the penny world I bought
       To eat with Pipit behind the screen?
     The red-eyed scavengers are creeping
       From Kentish Town and Golder's Green;

     Where are the eagles and the trumpets?

       Buried beneath some snow-deep Alps.
     Over buttered scones and crumpets
       Weeping, weeping multitudes
     Droop in a hundred A.B.C.'s

     ["ABC's" signifes endemic teashops, found in all parts of
     London. The initials signify "Aerated Bread Company,
     Limited."--Project Gutenberg Editor's replacement of
     original footnote]




Le Directeur

     Malheur à la malheureuse Tamise!
     Tamisel Qui coule si pres du Spectateur.
     Le directeur
     Conservateur
     Du Spectateur
     Empeste la brise.
     Les actionnaires
     Réactionnaires
     Du Spectateur
     Conservateur
     Bras dessus bras dessous
     Font des tours
     A pas de loup.
     Dans un égout
     Une petite fille
     En guenilles
     Camarde
     Regarde
     Le directeur
     Du Spectateur
     Conservateur
     Et crève d'amour.




Mélange adultère de tout

     En Amerique, professeur;
     En Angleterre, journaliste;
     C'est à grands pas et en sueur
     Que vous suivrez à peine ma piste.
     En Yorkshire, conferencier;
     A Londres, un peu banquier,
     Vous me paierez bien la tête.
     C'est à Paris que je me coiffe
     Casque noir de jemenfoutiste.
     En Allemagne, philosophe
     Surexcité par Emporheben
     Au grand air de Bergsteigleben;
     J'erre toujours de-ci de-là
     A divers coups de tra la la
     De Damas jusqu'à Omaha.
     Je celebrai mon jour de fête
     Dans une oasis d'Afrique
     Vêtu d'une peau de girafe.

     On montrera mon cénotaphe
     Aux côtes brûlantes de Mozambique.




Lune de Miel

     Ils ont vu les Pays-Bas, ils rentrent à Terre Haute;
     Mais une nuit d'été, les voici à Ravenne,
     A l'sur le dos écartant les genoux
     De quatre jambes molles tout gonflées de morsures.
     On relève le drap pour mieux égratigner.
     Moins d'une lieue d'ici est Saint Apollinaire
     In Classe, basilique connue des amateurs
     De chapitaux d'acanthe que touraoie le vent.

     Ils vont prendre le train de huit heures
     Prolonger leurs misères de Padoue à Milan
     Ou se trouvent le Cène, et un restaurant pas cher.
     Lui pense aux pourboires, et redige son bilan.
     Ils auront vu la Suisse et traversé la France.
     Et Saint Apollinaire, raide et ascétique,
     Vieille usine désaffectée de Dieu, tient encore
     Dans ses pierres ècroulantes la forme precise de Byzance.




The Hippopotamus

       Similiter et omnes revereantur Diaconos, ut
       mandatum Jesu Christi; et Episcopum, ut Jesum
       Christum, existentem filium Patris; Presbyteros
       autem, ut concilium Dei et conjunctionem
       Apostolorum. Sine his Ecclesia non vocatur; de
       quibus suadeo vos sic habeo.

       S. IGNATII AD TRALLIANOS.

       And when this epistle is read among you, cause
       that it be read also in the church of the
       Laodiceans.


     The broad-backed hippopotamus
     Rests on his belly in the mud;
     Although he seems so firm to us
     He is merely flesh and blood.

     Flesh-and-blood is weak and frail,
     Susceptible to nervous shock;
     While the True Church can never fail
     For it is based upon a rock.

     The hippo's feeble steps may err
     In compassing material ends,
     While the True Church need never stir
     To gather in its dividends.

     The 'potamus can never reach
     The mango on the mango-tree;
     But fruits of pomegranate and peach
     Refresh the Church from over sea.

     At mating time the hippo's voice
     Betrays inflexions hoarse and odd,
     But every week we hear rejoice
     The Church, at being one with God.

     The hippopotamus's day
     Is passed in sleep; at night he hunts;
     God works in a mysterious way-
     The Church can sleep and feed at once.

     I saw the 'potamus take wing
     Ascending from the damp savannas,
     And quiring angels round him sing
     The praise of God, in loud hosannas.

     Blood of the Lamb shall wash him clean
     And him shall heavenly arms enfold,
     Among the saints he shall be seen
     Performing on a harp of gold.

     He shall be washed as white as snow,
     By all the martyr'd virgins kiss,
     While the True Church remains below
     Wrapt in the old miasmal mist.




Dans le Restaurant

     Le garcon délabré qui n'a rien à faire
     Que de se gratter les doigts et se pencher sur mon épaule:
       "Dans mon pays il fera temps pluvieux,
       Du vent, du grand soleil, et de la pluie;
       C'est ce qu'on appelle le jour de lessive des gueux."
     (Bavard, baveux, à la croupe arrondie,
     Je te prie, au moins, ne bave pas dans la soupe).
       "Les saules trempés, et des bourgeons sur les ronces--
       C'est là, dans une averse, qu'on s'abrite.
     J'avais septtans, elle était plus petite.
       Elle etait toute mouillée, je lui ai donné des primavères."
     Les tâches de son gilet montent au chiffre de trente-huit.
       "Je la chatouillais, pour la faire rire.
       J'éprouvais un instant de puissance et de délire."

             Mais alors, vieux lubrique, a cet âge...
       "Monsieur, le fait est dur.
       Il est venu, nous peloter, un gros chien;
       Moi j'avais peur, je l'ai quittee a mi-chemin.
       C'est dommage."

           Mais alors, tu as ton vautour!
     Va t'en te décrotter les rides du visage;
     Tiens, ma fourchette, décrasse-toi le crâne.
     De quel droit payes-tu des expériences comme moi?
     Tiens, voilà dix sous, pour la salle-de-bains.

     Phlébas, le Phénicien, pendant quinze jours noyé,
     Oubliait les cris des mouettes et la houle de Cornouaille,
     Et les profits et les pertes, et la cargaison d'etain:
     Un courant de sous-mer l'emporta tres loin,
     Le repassant aux étapes de sa vie antérieure.
     Figurez-vous donc, c'etait un sort penible;
     Cependant, ce fut jadis un bel homme, de haute taille.




Whispers of Immortality

     Webster was much possessed by death
     And saw the skull beneath the skin;
     And breastless creatures under ground
     Leaned backward with a lipless grin.

     Daffodil bulbs instead of balls
     Stared from the sockets of the eyes!
     He knew that thought clings round dead limbs
     Tightening its lusts and luxuries.

     Donne, I suppose, was such another
     Who found no substitute for sense;
     To seize and clutch and penetrate,
     Expert beyond experience,

     He knew the anguish of the marrow
     The ague of the skeleton;
     No contact possible to flesh
     Allayed the fever of the bone.

    .    .    .    .    .

     Grishkin is nice: her Russian eye
     Is underlined for emphasis;
     Uncorseted, her friendly bust
     Gives promise of pneumatic bliss.

     The couched Brazilian jaguar
     Compels the scampering marmoset
     With subtle effluence of cat;
     Grishkin has a maisonette;

     The sleek Brazilian jaguar
     Does not in its arboreal gloom
     Distil so rank a feline smell
     As Grishkin in a drawing-room.

     And even the Abstract Entities
     Circumambulate her charm;
     But our lot crawls between dry ribs
     To keep our metaphysics warm.




Mr. Eliot's Sunday Morning Service

       Look, look, master, here comes two religious
       caterpillars.
                     The Jew of Malta.


     Polyphiloprogenitive
     The sapient sutlers of the Lord
     Drift across the window-panes.
     In the beginning was the Word.

     In the beginning was the Word.
     Superfetation of [Greek text inserted here],
     And at the mensual turn of time
     Produced enervate Origen.

     A painter of the Umbrian school
     Designed upon a gesso ground
     The nimbus of the Baptized God.
     The wilderness is cracked and browned

     But through the water pale and thin
     Still shine the unoffending feet
     And there above the painter set
     The Father and the Paraclete.
    .    .    .    .    .
     The sable presbyters approach
     The avenue of penitence;
     The young are red and pustular
     Clutching piaculative pence.

     Under the penitential gates
     Sustained by staring Seraphim
     Where the souls of the devout
     Burn invisible and dim.

     Along the garden-wall the bees
     With hairy bellies pass between
     The staminate and pistilate,
     Blest office of the epicene.

     Sweeney shifts from ham to ham
     Stirring the water in his bath.
     The masters of the subtle schools
     Are controversial, polymath.




Sweeney Among the Nightingales

       [Greek text inserted here]


     Apeneck Sweeney spreads his knees
     Letting his arms hang down to laugh,
     The zebra stripes along his jaw
     Swelling to maculate giraffe.

     The circles of the stormy moon
     Slide westward toward the River Plate,
     Death and the Raven drift above
     And Sweeney guards the hornèd gate.

     Gloomy Orion and the Dog
     Are veiled; and hushed the shrunken seas;
     The person in the Spanish cape
     Tries to sit on Sweeney's knees

     Slips and pulls the table cloth
     Overturns a coffee-cup,
     Reorganized upon the floor
     She yawns and draws a stocking up;

     The silent man in mocha brown
     Sprawls at the window-sill and gapes;
     The waiter brings in oranges
     Bananas figs and hothouse grapes;

     The silent vertebrate in brown
     Contracts and concentrates, withdraws;
     Rachel née Rabinovitch
     Tears at the grapes with murderous paws;

     She and the lady in the cape
     Are suspect, thought to be in league;
     Therefore the man with heavy eyes
     Declines the gambit, shows fatigue,

     Leaves the room and reappears
     Outside the window, leaning in,
     Branches of wisteria
     Circumscribe a golden grin;

     The host with someone indistinct
     Converses at the door apart,
     The nightingales are singing near
     The Convent of the Sacred Heart,

     And sang within the bloody wood
     When Agamemnon cried aloud,
     And let their liquid droppings fall
     To stain the stiff dishonoured shroud.




The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock

       S'io credesse che mia risposta fosse
       A persona che mai tornasse al mondo,
       Questa fiamma staria senza piu scosse.
       Ma perciocche giammai di questo fondo
       Non torno vivo alcun, s'i'odo il vero,
       Senza tema d'infamia ti rispondo.


     Let us go then, you and I,
     When the evening is spread out against the sky
     Like a patient etherized upon a table;
     Let us go, through certain half-deserted streets,
     The muttering retreats
     Of restless nights in one-night cheap hotels
     And sawdust restaurants with oyster-shells:
     Streets that follow like a tedious argument
     Of insidious intent
     To lead you to an overwhelming question....
     Oh, do not ask, "What is it?"
     Let us go and make our visit.

     In the room the women come and go
     Talking of Michelangelo.

     The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes,
     The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes
     Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening,
     Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains,
     Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys,
     Slipped by the terrace, made a sudden leap,
     And seeing that it was a soft October night,
     Curled once about the house, and fell asleep.

     And indeed there will be time
     For the yellow smoke that slides along the street,
     Rubbing its back upon the window panes;
     There will be time, there will be time
     To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet
     There will be time to murder and create,
     And time for all the works and days of hands
     That lift and drop a question on your plate;
     Time for you and time for me,
     And time yet for a hundred indecisions,
     And for a hundred visions and revisions,
     Before the taking of a toast and tea.

     In the room the women come and go
     Talking of Michelangelo.

     And indeed there will be time
     To wonder, "Do I dare?" and, "Do I dare?"
     Time to turn back and descend the stair,
     With a bald spot in the middle of my hair--
     (They will say: "How his hair is growing thin!")
     My morning coat, my collar mounting firmly to the chin,
     My necktie rich and modest, but asserted by a simple pin--
     (They will say: "But how his arms and legs are thin!")
     Do I dare
     Disturb the universe?
     In a minute there is time
     For decisions and revisions which a minute will reverse.

     For I have known them all already, known them all:
     Have known the evenings, mornings, afternoons,
     I have measured out my life with coffee spoons;
     I know the voices dying with a dying fall
     Beneath the music from a farther room.
       So how should I presume?

     And I have known the eyes already, known them all--
     The eyes that fix you in a formulated phrase,
     And when I am formulated, sprawling on a pin,
     When I am pinned and wriggling on the wall,
     Then how should I begin
     To spit out all the butt-ends of my days and ways?
       And how should I presume?

     And I have known the arms already, known them all--
     Arms that are braceleted and white and bare
     (But in the lamplight, downed with light brown hair!)
     Is it perfume from a dress
     That makes me so digress?
     Arms that lie along a table, or wrap about a shawl.
       And should I then presume?
       And how should I begin?
    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
     Shall I say, I have gone at dusk through narrow streets
     And watched the smoke that rises from the pipes
     Of lonely men in shirt-sleeves, leaning out of windows?

     I should have been a pair of ragged claws
     Scuttling across the doors of silent seas.
    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

     And the afternoon, the evening, sleeps so peacefully!
     Smoothed by long fingers,
     Asleep... tired... or it malingers.
     Stretched on the floor, here beside you and me.
     Should I, after tea and cakes and ices,
     Have the strength to force the moment to its crisis?
     But though I have wept and fasted, wept and prayed,
     Though I have seen my head (grown slightly bald) brought in upon a platter,
     I am no prophet--and here's no great matter;
     I have seen the moment of my greatness flicker,
     And I have seen the eternal Footman hold my coat, and snicker,
     And in short, I was afraid.

     And would it have been worth it, after all,
     After the cups, the marmalade, the tea,
     Among the porcelain, among some talk of you and me,
     Would it have been worth while,
     To have bitten off the matter with a smile,
     To have squeezed the universe into a ball
     To roll it toward some overwhelming question,
     To say: "I am Lazarus, come from the dead,
     Come back to tell you all, I shall tell you all"--
     If one, settling a pillow by her head,
       Should say: "That is not what I meant at all;
       That is not it, at all."

     And would it have been worth it, after all,
     Would it have been worth while,
     After the sunsets and the dooryards and the sprinkled streets,
     After the novels, after the teacups, after the skirts that trail along the
         floor--
     And this, and so much more?--
     It is impossible to say just what I mean!
     But as if a magic lantern threw the nerves in patterns on a screen:
     Would it have been worth while
     If one, settling a  pillow or throwing off a shawl,
     And turning toward the window, should say:
       "That is not it at all,
       That is not what I meant, at all."
    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
     No! I am not Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be;
     Am an attendant lord, one that will do
     To swell a progress, start a scene or two,
     Advise the prince; no doubt, an easy tool,
     Deferential, glad to be of use,
     Politic, cautious, and meticulous;
     Full of high sentence, but a bit obtuse;
     At times, indeed, almost ridiculous--
     Almost, at times, the Fool.

     I grow old... I grow old...
     I shall wear the bottoms of my trousers rolled.

     Shall I part my hair behind? Do I dare to eat a peach?
     I shall wear white flannel trousers, and walk upon the beach.
     I have heard the mermaids singing, each to each.

     I do not think that they will sing to me.

     I have seen them riding seaward on the waves
     Combing the white hair of the waves blown back
     When the wind blows the water white and black.

     We have lingered in the chambers of the sea
     By sea-girls wreathed with seaweed red and brown
     Till human voices wake us, and we drown.




Portrait of a Lady

       Thou hast committed--
       Fornication: but that was in another country
       And besides, the wench is dead.
       The Jew of Malta.


     I

     Among the smoke and fog of a December afternoon
     You have the scene arrange itself--as it will seem to do--
     With "I have saved this afternoon for you";
     And four wax candles in the darkened room,
     Four rings of light upon the ceiling overhead,
     An atmosphere of Juliet's tomb
     Prepared for all the things to be said, or left unsaid.
     We have been, let us say, to hear the latest Pole
     Transmit the Preludes, through his hair and finger-tips.
     "So intimate, this Chopin, that I think his soul
     Should be resurrected only among friends
     Some two or three, who will not touch the bloom
     That is rubbed and questioned in the concert room."
     --And so the conversation slips
     Among velleities and carefully caught regrets
     Through attenuated tones of violins
     Mingled with remote cornets
     And begins.

     "You do not know how much they mean to me, my friends,
     And how, how rare and strange it is, to find
     In a life composed so much, so much of odds and ends,
     (For indeed I do not love it... you knew? you are not blind!
     How keen you are!)
     To find a friend who has these qualities,
     Who has, and gives
     Those qualities upon which friendship lives.
     How much it means that I say this to you--
     Without these friendships--life, what cauchemar!"
     Among the windings of the violins
     And the ariettes
     Of cracked cornets
     Inside my brain a dull tom-tom begins
     Absurdly hammering a prelude of its own,
     Capricious monotone
     That is at least one definite "false note."
     --Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance,
     Admire the monuments
     Discuss the late events,
     Correct our watches by the public clocks.
     Then sit for half an hour and drink our bocks.

     II

     Now that lilacs are in bloom
     She has a bowl of lilacs in her room
     And twists one in her fingers while she talks.
     "Ah, my friend, you do not know, you do not know
     What life is, you should hold it in your hands";
     (Slowly twisting the lilac stalks)
     "You let it flow from you, you let it flow,
     And youth is cruel, and has no remorse
     And smiles at situations which it cannot see."
     I smile, of course,
     And go on drinking tea.
     "Yet with these April sunsets, that somehow recall
     My buried life, and Paris in the Spring,
     I feel immeasurably at peace, and find the world
     To be wonderful and youthful, after all."

     The voice returns like the insistent out-of-tune
     Of a broken violin on an August afternoon:
     "I am always sure that you understand
     My feelings, always sure that you feel,
     Sure that across the gulf you reach your hand.

     You are invulnerable, you have no Achilles' heel.
     You will go on, and when you have prevailed
     You can say: at this point many a one has failed.

     But what have I, but what have I, my friend,
     To give you, what can you receive from me?
     Only the friendship and the sympathy
     Of one about to reach her journey's end.

     I shall sit here, serving tea to friends...."

     I take my hat: how can I make a cowardly amends
     For what she has said to me?
     You will see me any morning in the park
     Reading the comics and the sporting page.
     Particularly I remark An English countess goes upon the stage.
     A Greek was murdered at a Polish dance,
     Another bank defaulter has confessed.
     I keep my countenance, I remain self-possessed
     Except when a street piano, mechanical and tired
     Reiterates some worn-out common song
     With the smell of hyacinths across the garden
     Recalling things that other people have desired.
     Are these ideas right or wrong?

     III

     The October night comes down; returning as before
     Except for a slight sensation of being ill at ease
     I mount the stairs and turn the handle of the door
     And feel as if I had mounted on my hands and knees.

     "And so you are going abroad; and when do you return?
     But that's a useless question.
     You hardly know when you are coming back,
     You will find so much to learn."
     My smile falls heavily among the bric-à-brac.

     "Perhaps you can write to me."
     My self-possession flares up for a second;
     This is as I had reckoned.

     "I have been wondering frequently of late
     (But our beginnings never know our ends!)
     Why we have not developed into friends."
     I feel like one who smiles, and turning shall remark
     Suddenly, his expression in a glass.
     My self-possession gutters; we are really in the dark.

     "For everybody said so, all our friends,
     They all were sure our feelings would relate
     So closely! I myself can hardly understand.
     We must leave it now to fate.
     You will write, at any rate.
     Perhaps it is not too late.
     I shall sit here, serving tea to friends."

     And I must borrow every changing shape
     To find expression... dance, dance
     Like a dancing bear,
     Cry like a parrot, chatter like an ape.
     Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance--
     Well! and what if she should die some afternoon,
     Afternoon grey and smoky, evening yellow and rose;
     Should die and leave me sitting pen in hand
     With the smoke coming down above the housetops;
     Doubtful, for quite a while
     Not knowing what to feel or if I understand
     Or whether wise or foolish, tardy or too soon...
     Would she not have the advantage, after all?
     This music is successful with a "dying fall"
     Now that we talk of dying--
     And should I have the right to smile?




Preludes

     I

     The winter evening settles down
     With smell of steaks in passageways.
     Six o'clock.
     The burnt-out ends of smoky days.
     And now a gusty shower wraps
     The grimy scraps
     Of withered leaves about your feet
     And newspapers from vacant lots;
     The showers beat
     On broken blinds and chimney-pots,
     And at the corner of the street
     A lonely cab-horse steams and stamps.
     And then the lighting of the lamps.

     II

     The morning comes to consciousness
     Of faint stale smells of beer
     From the sawdust-trampled street
     With all its muddy feet that press
     To early coffee-stands.

     With the other masquerades
     That time resumes,
     One thinks of all the hands
     That are raising dingy shades
     In a thousand furnished rooms.

     III

     You tossed a blanket from the bed,
     You lay upon your back, and waited;
     You dozed, and watched the night revealing
     The thousand sordid images
     Of which your soul was constituted;
     They flickered against the ceiling.
     And when all the world came back
     And the light crept up between the shutters,
     And you heard the sparrows in the gutters,
     You had such a vision of the street
     As the street hardly understands;
     Sitting along the bed's edge, where
     You curled the papers from your hair,
     Or clasped the yellow soles of feet
     In the palms of both soiled hands.

     IV

     His soul stretched tight across the skies
     That fade behind a city block,
     Or trampled by insistent feet
     At four and five and six o'clock;
     And short square fingers stuffing pipes,
     And evening newspapers, and eyes
     Assured of certain certainties,
     The conscience of a blackened street
     Impatient to assume the world.

     I am moved by fancies that are curled
     Around these images, and cling:
     The notion of some infinitely gentle
     Infinitely suffering thing.

     Wipe your hand across your mouth, and laugh;
     The worlds revolve like ancient women
     Gathering fuel in vacant lots.




Rhapsody on a Windy Night

     Twelve o'clock.
     Along the reaches of the street
     Held in a lunar synthesis,
     Whispering lunar incantations
     Disolve the floors of memory
     And all its clear relations,
     Its divisions and precisions,
     Every street lamp that I pass
     Beats like a fatalistic drum,
     And through the spaces of the dark
     Midnight shakes the memory
     As a madman shakes a dead geranium.

     Half-past one,
     The street lamp sputtered,
     The street lamp muttered,
     The street lamp said,
     "Regard that woman
     Who hesitates toward you in the light of the door
     Which opens on her like a grin.
     You see the border of her dress
     Is torn and stained with sand,
     And you see the corner of her eye
     Twists like a crooked pin."

     The memory throws up high and dry
     A crowd of twisted things;
     A twisted branch upon the beach
     Eaten smooth, and polished
     As if the world gave up
     The secret of its skeleton,
     Stiff and white.
     A broken spring in a factory yard,
     Rust that clings to the form that the strength has left
     Hard and curled and ready to snap.

     Half-past two,
     The street-lamp said,
     "Remark the cat which flattens itself in the gutter,
     Slips out its tongue
     And devours a morsel of rancid butter."
     So the hand of the child, automatic,
     Slipped out and pocketed a toy that was running along
     the quay.
     I could see nothing behind that child's eye.
     I have seen eyes in the street
     Trying to peer through lighted shutters,
     And a crab one afternoon in a pool,
     An old crab with barnacles on his back,
     Gripped the end of a stick which I held him.

     Half-past three,
     The lamp sputtered,
     The lamp muttered in the dark.

     The lamp hummed:
     "Regard the moon,
     La lune ne garde aucune rancune,
     She winks a feeble eye,
     She smiles into corners.
     She smooths the hair of the grass.
     The moon has lost her memory.
     A washed-out smallpox cracks her face,
     Her hand twists a paper rose,
     That smells of dust and old Cologne,
     She is alone With all the old nocturnal smells
     That cross and cross across her brain.
     The reminiscence comes
     Of sunless dry geraniums
     And dust in crevices,
     Smells of chestnuts in the streets
     And female smells in shuttered rooms
     And cigarettes in corridors
     And cocktail smells in bars."

     The lamp said,
     "Four o'clock,
     Here is the number on the door.
     Memory!
     You have the key,
     The little lamp spreads a ring on the stair,
     Mount.
     The bed is open; the tooth-brush hangs on the wall,
     Put your shoes at the door, sleep, prepare for life."

     The last twist of the knife.




Morning at the Window

     They are rattling breakfast plates in basement kitchens,
     And along the trampled edges of the street
     I am aware of the damp souls of housemaids
     Sprouting despondently at area gates.
     The brown waves of fog toss up to me
     Twisted faces from the bottom of the street,
     And tear from a passer-by with muddy skirts
     An aimless smile that hovers in the air
     And vanishes along the level of the roofs.




The Boston Evening Transcript

     The readers of the Boston Evening Transcript
     Sway in the wind like a field of ripe corn.
     When evening quickens faintly in the street,
     Wakening the appetites of life in some
     And to others bringing the Boston Evening Transcript,
     I mount the steps and ring the bell, turning
     Wearily, as one would turn to nod good-bye to Rochefoucauld,
     If the street were time and he at the end of the street,
     And I say, "Cousin Harriet, here is the Boston Evening Transcript."




Aunt Helen

     Miss Helen Slingsby was my maiden aunt,
     And lived in a small house near a fashionable square
     Cared for by servants to the number of four.
     Now when she died there was silence in heaven
     And silence at her end of the street.
     The shutters were drawn and the undertaker wiped his feet--
     He was aware that this sort of thing had occurred before.
     The dogs were handsomely provided for,
     But shortly afterwards the parrot died too.
     The Dresden clock continued ticking on the mantelpiece,
     And the footman sat upon the dining-table
     Holding the second housemaid on his knees--
     Who had always been so careful while her mistress lived.




Cousin Nancy

     Miss Nancy Ellicott Strode across the hills and broke them,
     Rode across the hills and broke them--
     The barren New England hills--
     Riding to hounds
     Over the cow-pasture.

     Miss Nancy Ellicott smoked
     And danced all the modern dances;
     And her aunts were not quite sure how they felt about it,
     But they knew that it was modern.

     Upon the glazen shelves kept watch
     Matthew and Waldo, guardians of the faith,
     The army of unalterable law.




Mr. Apollinax

     When Mr. Apollinax visited the United States
     His laughter tinkled among the teacups.
     I thought of Fragilion, that shy figure among the birch-trees,
     And of Priapus in the shrubbery
     Gaping at the lady in the swing.
     In the palace of Mrs. Phlaccus, at Professor Channing-Cheetah's
     He laughed like an irresponsible foetus.
     HWith your aid indiffeis laughter was submarine and profound
     Like the old man of the sea's
     Hidden under coral islands
     Where worried bodies of drowned men drift down in the green silence,
     Dropping from fingers of surf.
     I looked for the head of Mr. Apollinax rolling under a chair
     Or grinning over a screen
     With seaweed in its hair.
     I heard the beat of centaur's hoofs over the hard turf
     As his dry and passionate talk devoured the afternoon.
     "He is a charming man"--"But after all what did he mean?"--
     "His pointed ears... He must be unbalanced,"--
     "There was something he said that I might have challenged."
     Of dowager Mrs. Phlaccus, and Professor and Mrs. Cheetah
     I remember a slice of lemon, and a bitten macaroon.




Hysteria

     As she laughed I was aware of becoming involved in her
     laughter and being part of it, until her teeth were
     only accidental stars with a talent for squad-drill. I
     was drawn in by short gasps, inhaled at each momentary
     recovery, lost finally in the dark caverns of her
     throat, bruised by the ripple of unseen muscles. An
     elderly waiter with trembling hands was hurriedly
     spreading a pink and white checked cloth over the rusty
     green iron table, saying: "If the lady and gentleman
     wish to take their tea in the garden, if the lady and
     gentleman wish to take their tea in the garden..." I
     decided that if the shaking of her breasts could be
     stopped, some of the fragments of the afternoon might
     be collected, and I concentrated my attention with
     careful subtlety to this end.




Conversation Galante

     I observe: "Our sentimental friend the moon!
     Or possibly (fantastic, I confess)
     It may be Prester John's balloon
     Or an old battered lantern hung aloft
     To light poor travellers to their distress."
       She then: "How you digress!"

     And I then: "Some one frames upon the keys
     That exquisite nocturne, with which we explain
     The night and moonshine; music which we seize
     To body forth our vacuity."
       She then: "Does this refer to me?"
       "Oh no, it is I who am inane."

     "You, madam, are the eternal humorist,
     The eternal enemy of the absolute,
     Giving our vagrant moods the slightest twist!
     With your air indifferent and imperious
     At a stroke our mad poetics to confute--"
       And--"Are we then so serious?"




La Figlia Che Piange

       O quam te memorem Virgo...


     Stand on the highest pavement of the stair--
     Lean on a garden urn--
     Weave, weave the sunlight in your hair--
     Clasp your flowers to you with a pained surprise--
     Fling them to the ground and turn
     With a fugitive resentment in your eyes:
     But weave, weave the sunlight in your hair.

     So I would have had him leave,
     So I would have had her stand and grieve,
     So he would have left
     As the soul leaves the body torn and bruised,
     As the mind deserts the body it has used.
     I should find
     Some way incomparably light and deft,
     Some way we both should understand,
     Simple and faithless as a smile and shake of the hand.

     She turned away, but with the autumn weather
     Compelled my imagination many days,
     Many days and many hours:
     Her hair over her arms and her arms full of flowers.
     And I wonder how they should have been together!
     I should have lost a gesture and a pose.
     Sometimes these cogitations still amaze
     The troubled midnight and the noon's repose.


PRUFROCK AND OTHER OBSERVATIONS

By T. S. Eliot




                  To Jean Verdenal 1889-1915


Certain of these poems appeared first in "Poetry" and "Others"


Contents

     The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock
     Portrait of a Lady
     Preludes
     Rhapsody on a Windy Night
     Morning at the Window
     The Boston Evening Transcript
     Aunt Helen
     Cousin Nancy
     Mr. Apollinax
     Hysteria
     Conversation Galante
     La Figlia Che Piange




The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock


  S'io credesse che mia risposta fosse
  A persona che mai tornasse al mondo,
  Questa fiamma staria senza piu scosse.
  Ma perciocche giammai di questo fondo
  Non torno vivo alcun, s'i'odo il vero,
  Senza tema d'infamia ti rispondo.



 Let us go then, you and I,
 When the evening is spread out against the sky
 Like a patient etherized upon a table;
 Let us go, through certain half-deserted streets,
 The muttering retreats
 Of restless nights in one-night cheap hotels
 And sawdust restaurants with oyster-shells:
 Streets that follow like a tedious argument
 Of insidious intent
 To lead you to an overwhelming question ...
 Oh, do not ask, "What is it?"
 Let us go and make our visit.

 In the room the women come and go
 Talking of Michelangelo.

 The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes,
 The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes,
 Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening,
 Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains,
 Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys,
 Slipped by the terrace, made a sudden leap,
 And seeing that it was a soft October night,
 Curled once about the house, and fell asleep.

 And indeed there will be time
 For the yellow smoke that slides along the street,
 Rubbing its back upon the window-panes;
 There will be time, there will be time
 To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet;
 There will be time to murder and create,
 And time for all the works and days of hands
 That lift and drop a question on your plate;
 Time for you and time for me,
 And time yet for a hundred indecisions,
 And for a hundred visions and revisions,
 Before the taking of a toast and tea.

 In the room the women come and go
 Talking of Michelangelo.

 And indeed there will be time
 To wonder, "Do I dare?" and, "Do I dare?"
 Time to turn back and descend the stair,
 With a bald spot in the middle of my hair--
 (They will say: "How his hair is growing thin!")
 My morning coat, my collar mounting firmly to the chin,
 My necktie rich and modest, but asserted by a simple pin--
 (They will say: "But how his arms and legs are thin!")
 Do I dare
 Disturb the universe?
 In a minute there is time
 For decisions and revisions which a minute will reverse.

 For I have known them all already, known them all:
 Have known the evenings, mornings, afternoons,
 I have measured out my life with coffee spoons;
 I know the voices dying with a dying fall
 Beneath the music from a farther room.
   So how should I presume?
 And I have known the eyes already, known them all--
 The eyes that fix you in a formulated phrase,
 And when I am formulated, sprawling on a pin,
 When I am pinned and wriggling on the wall,
 Then how should I begin
 To spit out all the butt-ends of my days and ways?
   And how should I presume?

 And I have known the arms already, known them all--
 Arms that are braceleted and white and bare
 (But in the lamplight, downed with light brown hair!)
 Is it perfume from a dress
 That makes me so digress?
 Arms that lie along a table, or wrap about a shawl.
   And should I then presume?
   And how should I begin?

           *         *         *         *

 Shall I say, I have gone at dusk through narrow streets
 And watched the smoke that rises from the pipes
 Of lonely men in shirt-sleeves, leaning out of windows? ...

 I should have been a pair of ragged claws
 Scuttling across the floors of silent seas.

           *         *         *         *

 And the afternoon, the evening, sleeps so peacefully!
 Smoothed by long fingers,
 Asleep ... tired ... or it malingers,
 Stretched on the floor, here beside you and me.
 Should I, after tea and cakes and ices,
 Have the strength to force the moment to its crisis?
 But though I have wept and fasted, wept and prayed,
 Though I have seen my head (grown slightly bald) brought in upon a platter,
 I am no prophet--and here's no great matter;
 I have seen the moment of my greatness flicker,
 And I have seen the eternal Footman hold my coat, and snicker,
 And in short, I was afraid.

 And would it have been worth it, after all,
 After the cups, the marmalade, the tea,
 Among the porcelain, among some talk of you and me,
 Would it have been worth while,
 To have bitten off the matter with a smile,
 To have squeezed the universe into a ball
 To roll it toward some overwhelming question,
 To say: "I am Lazarus, come from the dead,
 Come back to tell you all, I shall tell you all"--
 If one, settling a pillow by her head,
   Should say: "That is not what I meant at all;
   That is not it, at all."

 And would it have been worth it, after all,
 Would it have been worth while,
 After the sunsets and the dooryards and the sprinkled streets,
 After the novels, after the teacups, after the skirts that trail along the
     floor--
 And this, and so much more?--
 It is impossible to say just what I mean!
 But as if a magic lantern threw the nerves in patterns on a screen:
 Would it have been worth while
 If one, settling a pillow or throwing off a shawl,
 And turning toward the window, should say:
   "That is not it at all,
   That is not what I meant, at all."

           *         *         *         *

 No! I am not Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be;
 Am an attendant lord, one that will do
 To swell a progress, start a scene or two,
 Advise the prince; no doubt, an easy tool,
 Deferential, glad to be of use,
 Politic, cautious, and meticulous;
 Full of high sentence, but a bit obtuse;
 At times, indeed, almost ridiculous--
 Almost, at times, the Fool.

 I grow old ... I grow old ...
 I shall wear the bottoms of my trousers rolled.

 Shall I part my hair behind? Do I dare to eat a peach?
 I shall wear white flannel trousers, and walk upon the beach.
 I have heard the mermaids singing, each to each.

 I do not think that they will sing to me.

 I have seen them riding seaward on the waves
 Combing the white hair of the waves blown back
 When the wind blows the water white and black.
 We have lingered in the chambers of the sea
 By sea-girls wreathed with seaweed red and brown
 Till human voices wake us, and we drown.




Portrait of a Lady

           Thou hast committed--
           Fornication: but that was in another country,
           And besides, the wench is dead.
                                 The Jew Of Malta


 I

 Among the smoke and fog of a December afternoon
 You have the scene arrange itself--as it will seem to do--
 With "I have saved this afternoon for you";
 And four wax candles in the darkened room,
 Four rings of light upon the ceiling overhead,
 An atmosphere of Juliet's tomb
 Prepared for all the things to be said, or left unsaid.
 We have been, let us say, to hear the latest Pole
 Transmit the Preludes, through his hair and finger tips.
 "So intimate, this Chopin, that I think his soul
 Should be resurrected only among friends
 Some two or three, who will not touch the bloom
 That is rubbed and questioned in the concert room."
 --And so the conversation slips
 Among velleities and carefully caught regrets
 Through attenuated tones of violins
 Mingled with remote cornets
 And begins.

 "You do not know how much they mean to me, my friends,
 And how, how rare and strange it is, to find
 In a life composed so much, so much of odds and ends,
 (For indeed I do not love it ... you knew? you are not blind!
 How keen you are!)
 To find a friend who has these qualities,
 Who has, and gives
 Those qualities upon which friendship lives.
 How much it means that I say this to you--
 Without these friendships--life, what cauchemar!"
 Among the windings of the violins
 And the ariettes
 Of cracked cornets
 Inside my brain a dull tom-tom begins
 Absurdly hammering a prelude of its own,
 Capricious monotone
 That is at least one definite "false note."
 --Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance,
 Admire the monuments
 Discuss the late events,
 Correct our watches by the public clocks.
 Then sit for half an hour and drink our bocks.


 II

 Now that lilacs are in bloom
 She has a bowl of lilacs in her room
 And twists one in her fingers while she talks.
 "Ah, my friend, you do not know, you do not know
 What life is, you who hold it in your hands";
 (Slowly twisting the lilac stalks)
 "You let it flow from you, you let it flow,
 And youth is cruel, and has no remorse
 And smiles at situations which it cannot see."
 I smile, of course,
 And go on drinking tea.
 "Yet with these April sunsets, that somehow recall
 My buried life, and Paris in the Spring,
 I feel immeasurably at peace, and find the world
 To be wonderful and youthful, after all."

 The voice returns like the insistent out-of-tune
 Of a broken violin on an August afternoon:
 "I am always sure that you understand
 My feelings, always sure that you feel,
 Sure that across the gulf you reach your hand.

 You are invulnerable, you have no Achilles' heel.
 You will go on, and when you have prevailed
 You can say: at this point many a one has failed.

 But what have I, but what have I, my friend,
 To give you, what can you receive from me?
 Only the friendship and the sympathy
 Of one about to reach her journey's end.

 I shall sit here, serving tea to friends...."

 I take my hat: how can I make a cowardly amends
 For what she has said to me?
 You will see me any morning in the park
 Reading the comics and the sporting page.
 Particularly I remark
 An English countess goes upon the stage.
 A Greek was murdered at a Polish dance,
 Another bank defaulter has confessed.
 I keep my countenance,
 I remain self-possessed
 Except when a street piano, mechanical and tired
 Reiterates some worn-out common song
 With the smell of hyacinths across the garden
 Recalling things that other people have desired.
 Are these ideas right or wrong?


 III

 The October night comes down; returning as before
 Except for a slight sensation of being ill at ease
 I mount the stairs and turn the handle of the door
 And feel as if I had mounted on my hands and knees.

 "And so you are going abroad; and when do you return?
 But that's a useless question.
 You hardly know when you are coming back,
 You will find so much to learn."
 My smile falls heavily among the bric-a-brac.

 "Perhaps you can write to me."
 My self-possession flares up for a second;
 This is as I had reckoned.
 "I have been wondering frequently of late
 (But our beginnings never know our ends!)
 Why we have not developed into friends."
 I feel like one who smiles, and turning shall remark
 Suddenly, his expression in a glass.
 My self-possession gutters; we are really in the dark.

 "For everybody said so, all our friends,
 They all were sure our feelings would relate
 So closely! I myself can hardly understand.
 We must leave it now to fate.
 You will write, at any rate.
 Perhaps it is not too late,
 I shall sit here, serving tea to friends."

 And I must borrow every changing
 find expression ... dance, dance
 Like a dancing bear,
 Cry like a parrot, chatter like an ape.
 Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance--

 Well! and what if she should die some afternoon,
 Afternoon grey and smoky, evening yellow and rose;
 Should die and leave me sitting pen in hand
 With the smoke coming down above the housetops;
 Doubtful, for quite a while
 Not knowing what to feel or if I understand
 Or whether wise or foolish, tardy or too soon ...
 Would she not have the advantage, after all?
 This music is successful with a "dying fall"
 Now that we talk of dying--
 And should I have the right to smile?




Preludes

 I

 The winter evening settles down
 With smell of steaks in passageways.
 Six o'clock.
 The burnt-out ends of smoky days.
 And now a gusty shower wraps
 The grimy scraps
 Of withered leaves about your feet
 And newspapers from vacant lots;
 The showers beat
 On broken blinds and chimney-pots,
 And at the corner of the street
 A lonely cab-horse steams and stamps.
 And then the lighting of the lamps.


 II

 The morning comes to consciousness
 Of faint stale smells of beer
 From the sawdust-trampled street
 With all its muddy feet that press
 To early coffee-stands.
 With the other masquerades
 That time resumes,
 One thinks of all the hands
 That are raising dingy shades
 In a thousand furnished rooms.


 III

 You tossed a blanket from the bed,
 You lay upon your back, and waited;
 You dozed, and watched the night revealing
 The thousand sordid images
 Of which your soul was constituted;
 They flickered against the ceiling.
 And when all the world came back
 And the light crept up between the shutters,
 And you heard the sparrows in the gutters,
 You had such a vision of the street
 As the street hardly understands;
 Sitting along the bed's edge, where
 You curled the papers from your hair,
 Or clasped the yellow soles of feet
 In the palms of both soiled hands.


 IV

 His soul stretched tight across the skies
 That fade behind a city block,
 Or trampled by insistent feet
 At four and five and six o'clock
 And short square fingers stuffing pipes,
 And evening newspapers, and eyes
 Assured of certain certainties,
 The conscience of a blackened street
 Impatient to assume the world.
 I am moved by fancies that are curled
 Around these images, and cling:
 The notion of some infinitely gentle
 Infinitely suffering thing.
 Wipe your hand across your mouth, and laugh;
 The worlds revolve like ancient women
 Gathering fuel in vacant lots.




Rhapsody on a Windy Night

 Twelve o'clock.
 Along the reaches of the street
 Held in a lunar synthesis,
 Whispering lunar incantations
 Dissolve the floors of the memory
 And all its clear relations,
 Its divisions and precisions,
 Every street lamp that I pass
 Beats like a fatalistic drum,
 And through the spaces of the dark
 Midnight shakes the memory
 As a madman shakes a dead geranium.

 Half-past one,
 The street lamp sputtered,
 The street lamp muttered,
 The street lamp said,
 "Regard that woman
 Who hesitates toward you in the light of the door
 Which opens on her like a grin.
 You see the border of her dress
 Is torn and stained with sand,
 And you see the corner of her eye
 Twists like a crooked pin."

 The memory throws up high and dry
 A crowd of twisted things;
 A twisted branch upon the beach
 Eaten smooth, and polished
 As if the world gave up
 The secret of its skeleton,
 Stiff and white.
 A broken spring in a factory yard,
 Rust that clings to the form that the strength has left
 Hard and curled and ready to snap.

 Half-past two,
 The street lamp said,
 "Remark the cat which flattens itself in the gutter,
 Slips out its tongue
 And devours a morsel of rancid butter."
 So the hand of a child, automatic
 Slipped out and pocketed a toy that was running along the quay.
 I could see nothing behind that child's eye.
 I have seen eyes in the street
 Trying to peer through lighted shutters,
 And a crab one afternoon in a pool,
 An old crab with barnacles on his back,
 Gripped the end of a stick which I held him.

 Half-past three,
 The lamp sputtered,
 The lamp muttered in the dark.

 The lamp hummed:
 "Regard the moon,
 La lune ne garde aucune rancune,
 She winks a feeble eye,
 She smiles into corners.
 She smoothes the hair of the grass.
 The moon has lost her memory.
 A washed-out smallpox cracks her face,
 Her hand twists a paper rose,
 That smells of dust and old Cologne,
 She is alone
 With all the old nocturnal smells
 That cross and cross across her brain.
 The reminiscence comes
 Of sunless dry geraniums
 And dust in crevices,
 Smells of chestnuts in the streets,
 And female smells in shuttered rooms,
 And cigarettes in corridors
 And cocktail smells in bars."

 The lamp said,
 "Four o'clock,
 Here is the number on the door.
 Memory!
 You have the key,
 The little lamp spreads a ring on the stair,
 Mount.
 The bed is open; the tooth-brush hangs on the wall
 Put your shoes at the door, sleep, prepare for life."

 The last twist of the knife.




Morning at the Window

 They are rattling breakfast plates in basement kitchens,
 And along the trampled edges of the street
 I am aware of the damp souls of housemaids
 Sprouting despondently at area gates.

 The brown waves of fog toss up to me
 Twisted faces from the bottom of the street,
 And tear from a passer-by with muddy skirts
 An aimless smile that hovers in the air
 And vanishes along the level of the roofs.




The Boston Evening Transcript

 The readers of the Boston Evening Transcript
 Sway in the blind like a field of ripe corn.
 When evening quickens faintly in the street,
 Wakening the appetites of life in some
 And to others bringing the Boston Evening Transcript,
 I mount the steps and ring the bell, turning
 Wearily, as one would turn to nod good-bye to Rochefoucauld
 If the street were time and he at the end of the street,
 And I say, "Cousin Harriet, here is the Boston Evening Transcript."




Aunt Helen

 Miss Helen Slingsby was my maiden aunt,
 And lived in a small house near a fashionable square
 Cared for by servants to the number of four.
 Now when she died there was silence in heaven
 And silence at her end of the street.
 The shutters were drawn and the undertaker wiped his feet--
 He was aware that this sort of thing had occurred before.
 The dogs were handsomely provided for,
 But shortly afterwards the parrot died too.
 The Dresden clock continued ticking on the mantelpiece,
 And the footman sat upon the dining-table
 Holding the second housemaid on his knees--
 Who had always been so careful while her mistress lived.




Cousin Nancy

 Miss Nancy Ellicot
 Strode across the hills and broke them
 Rode across the hills and broke them--
 The barren New England hills
 Riding to hounds
 Over the cow-pasture.

 Miss Nancy Ellicott smoked
 And danced all the modern dances;
 And her aunts were not quite sure how they felt about it,
 But they knew that it was modern.

 Upon the glazen shelves kept watch
 Matthew and Waldo, guardians of the faith,
 The army of unalterable law.




Mr. Apollinax

 When Mr. Apollinax visited the United States
 His laughter tinkled among the teacups.
 I thought of Fragilion, that shy figure among the birch-trees,
 And of Priapus in the shrubbery
 Gaping at the lady in the swing.
 In the palace of Mrs. Phlaccus, at Professor Channing-Cheetah's
 He laughed like an irresponsible foetus.
 His laughter was submarine and profound
 Like the old man of the seats
 Hidden under coral islands
 Where worried bodies of drowned men drift down in the green silence,
 Dropping from fingers of surf.
 I looked for the head of Mr. Apollinax rolling under a chair,
 Or grinning over a screen
 With seaweed in its hair.
 I heard the beat of centaurs' hoofs over the hard turf
 As his dry and passionate talk devoured the afternoon.
 "He is a charming man"--"But after all what did he mean?"--
 "He has pointed ears ... he must be unbalanced,"--
 "There was something he said that I might have challenged."
 Of dowager Mrs. Phlaccus, and Professor and Mrs. Cheetah
 I remember a slice of lemon and a bitten macaroon.




Hysteria

 As she laughed I was aware of becoming involved in her laughter and
 being part of it, until her teeth were only accidental stars with a
 talent for squad-drill. I was drawn in by short gasps, inhaled at
 each momentary recovery, lost finally in the dark caverns of her
 throat, bruised by the ripple of unseen muscles. An elderly waiter
 with trembling hands was hurriedly spreading a pink and white checked
 cloth over the rusty green iron table, saying: "If the lady and
 gentleman wish to take their tea in the garden, if the lady and
 gentleman wish to take their tea in the garden ..." I decided that
 if the shaking of her breasts could be stopped, some of the fragments
 of the afternoon might be collected, and I concentrated my attention
 with careful subtlety to this end.




Conversation Galante

 I observe: "Our sentimental friend the moon
 Or possibly (fantastic, I confess)
 It may be Prester John's balloon
 Or an old battered lantern hung aloft
 To light poor travellers to their distress."
   She then: "How you digress!"

 And I then: "Some one frames upon the keys
 That exquisite nocturne, with which we explain
 The night and moonshine; music which we seize
 To body forth our own vacuity."
   She then: "Does this refer to me?"
   "Oh no, it is I who am inane."

 "You, madam, are the eternal humorist
 The eternal enemy of the absolute,
 Giving our vagrant moods the slightest twist
 With your air indifferent and imperious
 At a stroke our mad poetics to confute--"
   And--"Are we then so serious?"




La Figlia Che Piange

 Stand on the highest pavement of the stair--
 Lean on a garden urn--
 Weave, weave the sunlight in your hair--
 Clasp your flowers to you with a pained surprise--
 Fling them to the ground and turn
 With a fugitive resentment in your eyes:
 But weave, weave the sunlight in your hair.

 So I would have had him leave,
 So I would have had her stand and grieve,
 So he would have left
 As the soul leaves the body torn and bruised
 As the mind deserts the body it has used.
 I should find
 Some way incomparably light and deft,
 Some way we both should understand,
 Simple and faithless as a smile and shake of the hand.

 She turned away, but with the autumn weather
 Compelled my imagination many days,
 Many days and many hours:
 Her hair over her arms and her arms full of flowers.
 And I wonder how they should have been together!
 I should have lost a gesture and a pose.
 Sometimes these cogitations still amaze
 The troubled midnight and the noon's repose.




THE WASTE LAND




"Nam Sibyllam quidem Cumis ego ipse oculis meis
vidi in ampulla pendere, et cum illi pueri dicerent:
Sibylla ti theleis; respondebat illa: apothanein thelo."


I. THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD

April is the cruellest month, breeding
Lilacs out of the dead land, mixing
Memory and desire, stirring
Dull roots with spring rain.
Winter kept us warm, covering
Earth in forgetful snow, feeding
A little life with dried tubers.
Summer surprised us, coming over the Starnbergersee
With a shower of rain; we stopped in the colonnade,
And went on in sunlight, into the Hofgarten,                            10
And drank coffee, and talked for an hour.
Bin gar keine Russin, stamm' aus Litauen, echt deutsch.
And when we were children, staying at the archduke's,
My cousin's, he took me out on a sled,
And I was frightened. He said, Marie,
Marie, hold on tight. And down we went.
In the mountains, there you feel free.
I read, much of the night, and go south in the winter.

What are the roots that clutch, what branches grow
Out of this stony rubbish? Son of man,                                  20
You cannot say, or guess, for you know only
A heap of broken images, where the sun beats,
And the dead tree gives no shelter, the cricket no relief,
And the dry stone no sound of water. Only
There is shadow under this red rock,
(Come in under the shadow of this red rock),
And I will show you something different from either
Your shadow at morning striding behind you
Or your shadow at evening rising to meet you;
I will show you fear in a handful of dust.                              30
     Frisch weht der Wind
     Der Heimat zu
     Mein Irisch Kind,
     Wo weilest du?
"You gave me hyacinths first a year ago;
"They called me the hyacinth girl."
- Yet when we came back, late, from the Hyacinth garden,
Your arms full, and your hair wet, I could not
Speak, and my eyes failed, I was neither
Living nor dead, and I knew nothing,                                    40
Looking into the heart of light, the silence.
Od' und leer das Meer.

Madame Sosostris, famous clairvoyante,
Had a bad cold, nevertheless
Is known to be the wisest woman in Europe,
With a wicked pack of cards. Here, said she,
Is your card, the drowned Phoenician Sailor,
(Those are pearls that were his eyes. Look!)
Here is Belladonna, the Lady of the Rocks,
The lady of situations.                                                 50
Here is the man with three staves, and here the Wheel,
And here is the one-eyed merchant, and this card,
Which is blank, is something he carries on his back,
Which I am forbidden to see. I do not find
The Hanged Man. Fear death by water.
I see crowds of people, walking round in a ring.
Thank you. If you see dear Mrs. Equitone,
Tell her I bring the horoscope myself:
One must be so careful these days.

Unreal City,                                                            60
Under the brown fog of a winter dawn,
A crowd flowed over London Bridge, so many,
I had not thought death had undone so many.
Sighs, short and infrequent, were exhaled,
And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.
Flowed up the hill and down King William Street,
To where Saint Mary Woolnoth kept the hours
With a dead sound on the final stroke of nine.
There I saw one I knew, and stopped him, crying "Stetson!
"You who were with me in the ships at Mylae!                            70
"That corpse you planted last year in your garden,
"Has it begun to sprout? Will it bloom this year?
"Or has the sudden frost disturbed its bed?

Line 42 Od'] Oed' - Editor.

"Oh keep the Dog far hence, that's friend to men,
"Or with his nails he'll dig it up again!
"You! hypocrite lecteur! - mon semblable, - mon frere!"

II. A GAME OF CHESS

The Chair she sat in, like a burnished throne,
Glowed on the marble, where the glass
Held up by standards wrought with fruited vines
From which a golden Cupidon peeped out                                  80
(Another hid his eyes behind his wing)
Doubled the flames of sevenbranched candelabra
Reflecting light upon the table as
The glitter of her jewels rose to meet it,
From satin cases poured in rich profusion;
In vials of ivory and coloured glass
Unstoppered, lurked her strange synthetic perfumes,
Unguent, powdered, or liquid - troubled, confused
And drowned the sense in odours; stirred by the air
That freshened from the window, these ascended                          90
In fattening the prolonged candle-flames,
Flung their smoke into the laquearia,
Stirring the pattern on the coffered ceiling.
Huge sea-wood fed with copper
Burned green and orange, framed by the coloured stone,
In which sad light a carved dolphin swam.
Above the antique mantel was displayed
As though a window gave upon the sylvan scene
The change of Philomel, by the barbarous king
So rudely forced; yet there the nightingale                             100
Filled all the desert with inviolable voice
And still she cried, and still the world pursues,
"Jug Jug" to dirty ears.
And other withered stumps of time
Were told upon the walls; staring forms
Leaned out, leaning, hushing the room enclosed.
Footsteps shuffled on the stair.
Under the firelight, under the brush, her hair
Spread out in fiery points
Glowed into words, then would be savagely still.                        110

"My nerves are bad to-night. Yes, bad. Stay with me.
"Speak to me. Why do you never speak. Speak.
"What are you thinking of? What thinking? What?
"I never know what you are thinking. Think."

I think we are in rats' alley
Where the dead men lost their bones.

"What is that noise?"
                             The wind under the door.
"What is that noise now? What is the wind doing?"
                             Nothing again nothing.                     120
                                                                  "Do
"You know nothing? Do you see nothing? Do you remember
"Nothing?"

   I remember
Those are pearls that were his eyes.
"Are you alive, or not? Is there nothing in your head?"
                                                                    But
O O O O that Shakespeherian Rag -
It's so elegant
So intelligent                                                          130
"What shall I do now? What shall I do?"
I shall rush out as I am, and walk the street
"With my hair down, so. What shall we do to-morrow?
"What shall we ever do?"
                                     The hot water at ten.
And if it rains, a closed car at four.
And we shall play a game of chess,
Pressing lidless eyes and waiting for a knock upon the door.

When Lil's husband got demobbed, I said -
I didn't mince my words, I said to her myself,                          140
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
Now Albert's coming back, make yourself a bit smart.
He'll want to know what you done with that money he gave you
To get yourself some teeth. He did, I was there.
You have them all out, Lil, and get a nice set,
He said, I swear, I can't bear to look at you.
And no more can't I, I said, and think of poor Albert,
He's been in the army four years, he wants a good time,
And if you don't give it him, there's others will, I said.
Oh is there, she said. Something o' that, I said.                       150
Then I'll know who to thank, she said, and give me a straight look.
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
If you don't like it you can get on with it, I said.
Others can pick and choose if you can't.
But if Albert makes off, it won't be for lack of telling.
You ought to be ashamed, I said, to look so antique.
(And her only thirty-one.)
I can't help it, she said, pulling a long face,
It's them pills I took, to bring it off, she said.
(She's had five already, and nearly died of young George.)              160
The chemist said it would be alright, but I've never been the same.
You are a proper fool, I said.
Well, if Albert won't leave you alone, there it is, I said,
What you get married for if you don't want children?
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
Well, that Sunday Albert was home, they had a hot gammon,
And they asked me in to dinner, to get the beauty of it hot -
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
HURRY UP PLEASE ITS TIME
Goonight Bill. Goonight Lou. Goonight May. Goonight.                    170
Ta ta. Goonight. Goonight.
Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good night.

III. THE FIRE SERMON

The river's tent is broken: the last fingers of leaf
Clutch and sink into the wet bank. The wind
Crosses the brown land, unheard. The nymphs are departed.
Sweet Thames, run softly, till I end my song.
The river bears no empty bottles, sandwich papers,
Silk handkerchiefs, cardboard boxes, cigarette ends
Or other testimony of summer nights. The nymphs are departed.
And their friends, the loitering heirs of city directors;               180
Departed, have left no addresses.

Line 161 ALRIGHT. This spelling occurs also in
the Hogarth Press edition - Editor.

By the waters of Leman I sat down and wept . . .
Sweet Thames, run softly till I end my song,
Sweet Thames, run softly, for I speak not loud or long.
But at my back in a cold blast I hear
The rattle of the bones, and chuckle spread from ear to ear.
A rat crept softly through the vegetation
Dragging its slimy belly on the bank
While I was fishing in the dull canal
On a winter evening round behind the gashouse                           190
Musing upon the king my brother's wreck
And on the king my father's death before him.
White bodies naked on the low damp ground
And bones cast in a little low dry garret,
Rattled by the rat's foot only, year to year.
But at my back from time to time I hear
The sound of horns and motors, which shall bring
Sweeney to Mrs. Porter in the spring.
O the moon shone bright on Mrs. Porter
And on her daughter                                                     200
They wash their feet in soda water
Et O ces voix d'enfants, chantant dans la coupole!

Twit twit twit
Jug jug jug jug jug jug
So rudely forc'd.
Tereu

Unreal City
Under the brown fog of a winter noon
Mr. Eugenides, the Smyrna merchant
Unshaven, with a pocket full of currants                                210
C.i.f. London: documents at sight,
Asked me in demotic French
To luncheon at the Cannon Street Hotel
Followed by a weekend at the Metropole.

At the violet hour, when the eyes and back
Turn upward from the desk, when the human engine waits
Like a taxi throbbing waiting,
I Tiresias, though blind, throbbing between two lives,
Old man with wrinkled female breasts, can see
At the violet hour, the evening hour that strives                       220
Homeward, and brings the sailor home from sea,
The typist home at teatime, clears her breakfast, lights
Her stove, and lays out food in tins.
Out of the window perilously spread
Her drying combinations touched by the sun's last rays,
On the divan are piled (at night her bed)
Stockings, slippers, camisoles, and stays.
I Tiresias, old man with wrinkled dugs
Perceived the scene, and foretold the rest -
I too awaited the expected guest.                                       230
He, the young man carbuncular, arrives,
A small house agent's clerk, with one bold stare,
One of the low on whom assurance sits
As a silk hat on a Bradford millionaire.
The time is now propitious, as he guesses,
The meal is ended, she is bored and tired,
Endeavours to engage her in caresses
Which still are unreproved, if undesired.
Flushed and decided, he assaults at once;
Exploring hands encounter no defence;                                   240
His vanity requires no response,
And makes a welcome of indifference.
(And I Tiresias have foresuffered all
Enacted on this same divan or bed;
I who have sat by Thebes below the wall
And walked among the lowest of the dead.)
Bestows one final patronising kiss,
And gropes his way, finding the stairs unlit . . .

She turns and looks a moment in the glass,
Hardly aware of her departed lover;                                     250
Her brain allows one half-formed thought to pass:
"Well now that's done: and I'm glad it's over."
When lovely woman stoops to folly and
Paces about her room again, alone,
She smoothes her hair with automatic hand,
And puts a record on the gramophone.

"This music crept by me upon the waters"
And along the Strand, up Queen Victoria Street.
O City city, I can sometimes hear
Beside a public bar in Lower Thames Street,                             260
The pleasant whining of a mandoline
And a clatter and a chatter from within
Where fishmen lounge at noon: where the walls
Of Magnus Martyr hold
Inexplicable splendour of Ionian white and gold.

     The river sweats
     Oil and tar
     The barges drift
     With the turning tide
     Red sails                                                          270
     Wide
     To leeward, swing on the heavy spar.
     The barges wash
     Drifting logs
     Down Greenwich reach
     Past the Isle of Dogs.
          Weialala leia
          Wallala leialala

     Elizabeth and Leicester
     Beating oars                                                       280
     The stern was formed
     A gilded shell
     Red and gold
     The brisk swell
     Rippled both shores
     Southwest wind
     Carried down stream
     The peal of bells
     White towers
          Weialala leia                                                 290
          Wallala leialala

"Trams and dusty trees.
Highbury bore me. Richmond and Kew
Undid me. By Richmond I raised my knees
Supine on the floor of a narrow canoe."

"My feet are at Moorgate, and my heart
Under my feet. After the event
He wept. He promised 'a new start'.
I made no comment. What should I resent?"
"On Margate Sands.                                                      300
I can connect
Nothing with nothing.
The broken fingernails of dirty hands.
My people humble people who expect
Nothing."
     la la

To Carthage then I came

Burning burning burning burning
O Lord Thou pluckest me out
O Lord Thou pluckest                                                    310

burning

IV. DEATH BY WATER

Phlebas the Phoenician, a fortnight dead,
Forgot the cry of gulls, and the deep sea swell
And the profit and loss.
                                         A current under sea
Picked his bones in whispers. As he rose and fell
He passed the stages of his age and youth
Entering the whirlpool.
                                       Gentile or Jew
O you who turn the wheel and look to windward,                          320
Consider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you.

V. WHAT THE THUNDER SAID

After the torchlight red on sweaty faces
After the frosty silence in the gardens
After the agony in stony places
The shouting and the crying
Prison and palace and reverberation
Of thunder of spring over distant mountains
He who was living is now dead
We who were living are now dying
With a little patience                                                  330

Here is no water but only rock
Rock and no water and the sandy road
The road winding above among the mountains
Which are mountains of rock without water
If there were water we should stop and drink
Amongst the rock one cannot stop or think
Sweat is dry and feet are in the sand
If there were only water amongst the rock
Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit
Here one can neither stand nor lie nor sit                              340
There is not even silence in the mountains
But dry sterile thunder without rain
There is not even solitude in the mountains
But red sullen faces sneer and snarl
From doors of mudcracked houses
                                                         If there were water
And no rock
If there were rock
And also water
And water                                                               350
A spring
A pool among the rock
If there were the sound of water only
Not the cicada
And dry grass singing
But sound of water over a rock
Where the hermit-thrush sings in the pine trees
Drip drop drip drop drop drop drop
But there is no water

Who is the third who walks always beside you?                          360
When I count, there are only you and I together
But when I look ahead up the white road
There is always another one walking beside you
Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded
I do not know whether a man or a woman
- But who is that on the other side of you?

What is that sound high in the air
Murmur of maternal lamentation
Who are those hooded hordes swarming
Over endless plains, stumbling in cracked earth                         370
Ringed by the flat horizon only
What is the city over the mountains
Cracks and reforms and bursts in the violet air
Falling towers
Jerusalem Athens Alexandria
Vienna London
Unreal

A woman drew her long black hair out tight
And fiddled whisper music on those strings
And bats with baby faces in the violet light                            380
Whistled, and beat their wings
And crawled head downward down a blackened wall
And upside down in air were towers
Tolling reminiscent bells, that kept the hours
And voices singing out of empty cisterns and exhausted wells.

In this decayed hole among the mountains
In the faint moonlight, the grass is singing
Over the tumbled graves, about the chapel
There is the empty chapel, only the wind's home.
It has no windows, and the door swings,                                 390
Dry bones can harm no one.
Only a cock stood on the rooftree
Co co rico co co rico
In a flash of lightning. Then a damp gust
Bringing rain

Ganga was sunken, and the limp leaves
Waited for rain, while the black clouds
Gathered far distant, over Himavant.
The jungle crouched, humped in silence.
Then spoke the thunder                                                  400
DA
Datta: what have we given?
My friend, blood shaking my heart
The awful daring of a moment's surrender
Which an age of prudence can never retract
By this, and this only, we have existed
Which is not to be found in our obituaries
Or in memories draped by the beneficent spider
Or under seals broken by the lean solicitor
In our empty rooms                                                     410
DA
Dayadhvam: I have heard the key
Turn in the door once and turn once only
We think of the key, each in his prison
Thinking of the key, each confirms a prison
Only at nightfall, aetherial rumours
Revive for a moment a broken Coriolanus
DA
Damyata: The boat responded
Gaily, to the hand expert with sail and oar                            420
The sea was calm, your heart would have responded
Gaily, when invited, beating obedient
To controlling hands

                                     I sat upon the shore
Fishing, with the arid plain behind me
Shall I at least set my lands in order?
London Bridge is falling down falling down falling down
Poi s'ascose nel foco che gli affina
Quando fiam ceu chelidon - O swallow swallow
Le Prince d'Aquitaine a la tour abolie                        430
These fragments I have shored against my ruins
Why then Ile fit you. Hieronymo's mad againe.
Datta. Dayadhvam. Damyata.
                           Shantih    shantih    shantih

Line 416 aetherial] aethereal
Line 429 ceu] uti - Editor


NOTES ON "THE WASTE LAND"

Not only the title, but the plan and a good deal of the
incidental symbolism of the poem were suggested
by Miss Jessie L. Weston's book on the Grail legend:
From Ritual to Romance (Macmillan).<1> Indeed,
so deeply am I indebted, Miss Weston's book will elucidate
the difficulties of the poem much better than my notes can do;
and I recommend it (apart from the great interest of the book itself)
to any who think such elucidation of the poem worth the trouble.
To another work of anthropology I am indebted in general, one which has
influenced our generation profoundly; I mean The Golden Bough; I have
used especially the two volumes Adonis, Attis, Osiris.  Anyone who is
acquainted with these works will immediately recognise in the poem
certain references to vegetation ceremonies.

<1> Macmillan] Cambridge.


I. THE BURIAL OF THE DEAD

Line 20.  Cf.  Ezekiel 2:1.

23.  Cf.  Ecclesiastes 12:5.

31.  V.  Tristan und Isolde, i, verses 5-8.

42.  Id.  iii, verse 24.

46.  I am not familiar with the exact constitution of the Tarot pack
of cards, from which I have obviously departed to suit my own convenience.
The Hanged Man, a member of the traditional pack, fits my purpose
in two ways:  because he is associated in my mind with the Hanged God
of Frazer, and because I associate him with the hooded figure in
the passage of the disciples to Emmaus in Part V. The Phoenician Sailor
and the Merchant appear later; also the "crowds of people," and
Death by Water is executed in Part IV.  The Man with Three Staves
(an authentic member of the Tarot pack) I associate, quite arbitrarily,
with the Fisher King himself.

60.  Cf.  Baudelaire:

     "Fourmillante cite;, cite; pleine de reves,
     Ou le spectre en plein jour raccroche le passant."

63.  Cf.  Inferno, iii.  55-7.

                                   "si lunga tratta
     di gente, ch'io non avrei mai creduto
     che morte tanta n'avesse disfatta."

64.  Cf.  Inferno, iv.  25-7:

     "Quivi, secondo che per ascoltare,
     "non avea pianto, ma' che di sospiri,
     "che l'aura eterna facevan tremare."

68.  A phenomenon which I have often noticed.

74.  Cf.  the Dirge in Webster's White Devil .

76.  V. Baudelaire, Preface to Fleurs du Mal.

II.  A GAME OF CHESS

77.  Cf.  Antony and Cleopatra, II. ii., l. 190.

92.  Laquearia.  V.  Aeneid, I. 726:

     dependent lychni laquearibus aureis incensi, et noctem flammis
                    funalia vincunt.

98.  Sylvan scene.  V. Milton, Paradise Lost, iv.  140.

99.  V. Ovid, Metamorphoses, vi, Philomela.

100.  Cf.  Part III, l. 204.

115.  Cf.  Part III, l. 195.

118.  Cf.  Webster:  "Is the wind in that door still?"

126.  Cf.  Part I, l. 37, 48.

138.  Cf.  the game of chess in Middleton's Women beware Women.

III.  THE FIRE SERMON

176.  V. Spenser, Prothalamion.

192.  Cf.  The Tempest, I.  ii.

196.  Cf.  Marvell, To His Coy Mistress.

197.  Cf.  Day, Parliament of Bees:

     "When of the sudden, listening, you shall hear,
     "A noise of horns and hunting, which shall bring
     "Actaeon to Diana in the spring,
     "Where all shall see her naked skin . . ."

199.  I do not know the origin of the ballad from which these lines
are taken:  it was reported to me from Sydney, Australia.

202.  V. Verlaine, Parsifal.

210.  The currants were quoted at a price "carriage and insurance
free to London"; and the Bill of Lading etc. were to be handed
to the buyer upon payment of the sight draft.

Notes 196 and 197 were transposed in this and the Hogarth Press edition,
but have been corrected here.

210.  "Carriage and insurance free"] "cost, insurance and freight"-Editor.

218.  Tiresias, although a mere spectator and not indeed a "character,"
is yet the most important personage in the poem, uniting all the rest.
Just as the one-eyed merchant, seller of currants, melts into
the Phoenician Sailor, and the latter is not wholly distinct
from Ferdinand Prince of Naples, so all the women are one woman,
and the two sexes meet in Tiresias.  What Tiresias sees, in fact,
is the substance of the poem.  The whole passage from Ovid is
of great anthropological interest:

     '. . . Cum Iunone iocos et maior vestra profecto est
     Quam, quae contingit maribus,' dixisse, 'voluptas.'
     Illa negat; placuit quae sit sententia docti
     Quaerere Tiresiae: venus huic erat utraque nota.
     Nam duo magnorum viridi coeuntia silva
     Corpora serpentum baculi violaverat ictu
     Deque viro factus, mirabile, femina septem
     Egerat autumnos; octavo rursus eosdem
     Vidit et 'est vestrae si tanta potentia plagae,'
     Dixit 'ut auctoris sortem in contraria mutet,
     Nunc quoque vos feriam!' percussis anguibus isdem
     Forma prior rediit genetivaque venit imago.
     Arbiter hic igitur sumptus de lite iocosa
     Dicta Iovis firmat; gravius Saturnia iusto
     Nec pro materia fertur doluisse suique
     Iudicis aeterna damnavit lumina nocte,
     At pater omnipotens (neque enim licet inrita cuiquam
     Facta dei fecisse deo) pro lumine adempto
     Scire futura dedit poenamque levavit honore.

221.  This may not appear as exact as Sappho's lines, but I had in mind
the "longshore" or "dory" fisherman, who returns at nightfall.

253.  V. Goldsmith, the song in The Vicar of Wakefield.

257.  V.  The Tempest, as above.

264.  The interior of St. Magnus Martyr is to my mind one of
the finest among Wren's interiors.  See The Proposed Demolition
of Nineteen City Churches (P. S. King & Son, Ltd.).

266.  The Song of the (three) Thames-daughters begins here.
From line 292 to 306 inclusive they speak in turn.
V.  Gutterdsammerung, III.  i:  the Rhine-daughters.

279.  V. Froude, Elizabeth, Vol.  I, ch.  iv, letter of De Quadra
to Philip of Spain:

"In the afternoon we were in a barge, watching the games on the river.
(The queen) was alone with Lord Robert and myself on the poop,
when they began to talk nonsense, and went so far that Lord Robert
at last said, as I was on the spot there was no reason why they
should not be married if the queen pleased."

293.  Cf.  Purgatorio, v.  133:

     "Ricorditi di me, che son la Pia;
     Siena mi fe', disfecemi Maremma."

307.  V. St. Augustine's Confessions:  "to Carthage then I came,
where a cauldron of unholy loves sang all about mine ears."

308.  The complete text of the Buddha's Fire Sermon (which corresponds
in importance to the Sermon on the Mount) from which these words are taken,
will be found translated in the late Henry Clarke Warren's Buddhism
in Translation (Harvard Oriental Series). Mr. Warren was one
of the great pioneers of Buddhist studies in the Occident.

309.  From St. Augustine's Confessions again.  The collocation
of these two representatives of eastern and western asceticism,
as the culmination of this part of the poem, is not an accident.

V. WHAT THE THUNDER SAID

In the first part of Part V three themes are employed:
the journey to Emmaus, the approach to the Chapel Perilous
(see Miss Weston's book) and the present decay of eastern Europe.

357.  This is Turdus aonalaschkae pallasii, the hermit-thrush
which I have heard in Quebec County.  Chapman says (Handbook of
Birds of Eastern North America) "it is most at home in secluded
woodland and thickety retreats. . . . Its notes are not remarkable
for variety or volume, but in purity and sweetness of tone and
exquisite modulation they are unequalled."  Its "water-dripping song"
is justly celebrated.

360.  The following lines were stimulated by the account of one
of the Antarctic expeditions (I forget which, but I think one
of Shackleton's): it was related that the party of explorers,
at the extremity of their strength, had the constant delusion
that there was one more member than could actually be counted.

367-77. Cf.  Hermann Hesse, Blick ins Chaos:

"Schon ist halb Europa, schon ist zumindest der halbe Osten Europas auf dem
Wege zum Chaos, fährt betrunken im heiligem Wahn am Abgrund entlang
und singt dazu, singt betrunken und hymnisch wie Dmitri Karamasoff sang.
Ueber diese Lieder lacht der Bürger beleidigt, der Heilige
und Seher hört sie mit Tränen."

402.  "Datta, dayadhvam, damyata" (Give, sympathize,
control). The fable of the meaning of the Thunder is found
in the Brihadaranyaka-Upanishad, 5, 1.  A translation is found
in Deussen's Sechzig Upanishads des Veda, p.  489.

408.  Cf.  Webster, The White Devil, v.  vi:

                                                    ". . . they'll remarry
   Ere the worm pierce your winding-sheet, ere the spider
   Make a thin curtain for your epitaphs."

412.  Cf.  Inferno, xxxiii.  46:

          "ed io sentii chiavar l'uscio di sotto
          all'orribile torre."

Also F. H. Bradley, Appearance and Reality, p.  346:

"My external sensations are no less private to myself than are my
thoughts or my feelings.  In either case my experience falls within
my own circle, a circle closed on the outside; and, with all its
elements alike, every sphere is opaque to the others which surround
it. . . . In brief, regarded as an existence which appears in a soul,
the whole world for each is peculiar and private to that soul."

425.  V. Weston, From Ritual to Romance; chapter on the Fisher King.

428.  V.  Purgatorio, xxvi.  148.

          "'Ara vos prec per aquella valor
           'que vos guida al som de l'escalina,
           'sovegna vos a temps de ma dolor.'
            Poi s'ascose nel foco che gli affina."

429.  V.  Pervigilium Veneris.  Cf.  Philomela in Parts II and III.

430.  V. Gerard de Nerval, Sonnet El Desdichado.

432.  V. Kyd's Spanish Tragedy.

434.  Shantih.  Repeated as here, a formal ending to an Upanishad.
'The Peace which passeth understanding' is a feeble translation
of the content of this word.





